FNB has U-turned on its original plan to cut the free Slow Lounge entries offered to qualifying Premier customers annually under its popular eBucks rewards programme. The changes originally meant bundled entries (depending on a customers’ eBucks level) would be dropped entirely for Premier customers, with only a possible 12 bonus entries able to be earned when booking flights via eBucks Travel. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. In an abrupt reversal on Tuesday, it announced that “FNB confirms its decision to keep SLOW lounge benefits for FNB Premier customers unchanged beyond 1 July 2021″. “This means that FNB Premier customers will continue to enjoy up to 8 SLOW lounge visits per annum plus 12* additional complimentary visits when booking flights via eBucks Travel.” It will, however, increase the number of bonus Slow Lounge entries that can be unlocked for Private Clients and Private Wealth accounts. A Private Clients customer on eBucks Level 5 could reach up to 38 entries a year from July (from the 34 now), while Private Wealth customer could reach a total of up to 60 entries (from the 48 now). Wider net It has also extended the Slow Lounge benefit to Aspire (formerly Gold) customers for the first time. These clients can unlock up to two bonus entries between July 2021 and June 2022 when booking their flights through eBucks Travel. This is a bold move and is part of its renewed push into the middle-income market with the launch of a new account to replace the tired Gold one. This puts it squarely against Capitec for many of these middle-income customers. Read: FNB increases private banking fees, launches new mid-market account The four other major changes to the eBucks programme for Private Clients, FNB Private Wealth and RMB Private Bank are: Engen fuel rewards, where up to R8 per litre can be earned, remain unchanged on Premier, Private Clients and Private Wealth accounts. It has overhauled the way in which middle-market customers earn eBucks. Aspire account holders who qualify for eBucks (minimum deposit and three payments/purchases on the app) will earn up to R150 per month in four categories: Fuel purchases at Engen will earn Aspire customers a flat rate of 60c per litre until they reach each reward amount (eg. R25 in eBucks) and up to the reward limit (R150 in eBucks). If they have a vehicle financed through Wesbank and fill up exclusively at Engen, this is doubled up at the end of the quarter (to R1.20 per litre). FNB Easy Smart customers can earn eBucks in a similar way to Aspire customers (they also need a minimum savings balance or credit product), but limited to up to R50 a month for spend on: Qualifying entry-level Easy PAYU customers will get a coupon for basic items when spending R150 a week at Shoprite, USave or Checkers. With the coupon, they will be pay R5 instead of R15 for one of the selected items. This equates to R40 in value a month.