Moneyweb – a leading publisher and broadcaster of business, finance and investment news, is looking for a new deputy editor to join the team. The position will report to the editor of Moneyweb. Position overview Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The successful candidate must have a track record of excellent writing skills and a strong news sense. The successful candidate will preferably have some experience in managing a team of journalists. The candidate must have a good grasp of the South African business and investment environment and an excellent network of contacts of leading business and investment leaders in the country. The candidate will also set Moneyweb’s editorial agenda and manage the newsdesk and the diaries of freelance journalists. The deputy editor will also play a pivotal role in conceptualising unique story ideas. The successful individual will work closely with the production team to ensure articles and multimedia content are presented to our audiences in a relevant, attractive and digestible way. Main responsibilities Minimum qualifications and requirements The salary is negotiable, and the journalist should preferably have their own transport. How to apply Applicants must send a CV and cover letter (no more than 500 words) outlining how they meet the position’s specific requirements and what they can add to Moneyweb to editor@moneyweb.co.za. Closing date for applications: June 18, 2021. Subject reference: Deputy editor Moneyweb is an equal opportunity employer. The appointment will be made in line with Moneyweb’s Employment Equity Plan and Policy. South Africans get preference. Applicants not contacted within 14 days from the closing date should consider their applications unsuccessful.