Asian stocks were steady and US equity futures edged lower Monday as traders weighed inflation risks and Janet Yellen’s comments on higher interest rates. Ten-year US Treasury yields and the dollar ticked up. Shares inched higher in Japan and dipped in Hong Kong, while S&P 500, Nasdaq 100 and European contracts were in the red. Treasury Secretary Yellen said President Joe Biden should push forward with his spending plans even if they spark inflation that persists into next year, adding a “slightly higher” interest rate environment would be a “plus.” Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Investors continue to assess whether price pressures will lead central banks to pare stimulus earlier than expected. The S&P 500 rose toward a record Friday on a jobs report that showed a pickup in hiring but fell short of estimates, suggesting ongoing scope for policy support. Meanwhile, the Group of Seven rich nations secured a landmark deal that could help countries collect more taxes from big firms and enable governments to impose levies on US tech giants such as Amazon.com Inc. and Facebook Inc.  Speculation continues that the US recovery from the pandemic may be strong enough to prompt Federal Reserve discussions in the weeks ahead on tapering asset purchases. Traders are looking ahead to the US consumer-price index report Thursday for more clues. “The slightly softer-than-expected rise in US payroll employment in May probably won’t change the Fed’s thinking, but another pickup in CPI inflation likely to be reported on Thursday will further spur the taper talk,” Shane Oliver, head of investment strategy and chief economist at AMP Capital, wrote in a note. Trade data from China showed exports continued to surge in May, although at a slower pace than the previous month, fueled by strong global demand. Oil in New York touched $70 a barrel for the first time since October 2018 before falling back. Bitcoin traded around $36 000 after declining over the weekend amid a cryptocurrency crackdown in China. For market commentary, follow the MLIV blog. Here are key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: