Asian stocks rose Tuesday, tracking a US equity rebound, as concerns over the Federal Reserve’s hawkish tilt were tempered by the prospect that policy tightening would be gradual. Treasuries steadied after a retreat. Japanese shares outperformed, helping a gauge of Asia-Pacific stocks to the biggest climb in about three weeks. S&P 500 contracts edged up after the index rallied overnight, aided by a revival of the value trade in sectors like energy and financials. European equity futures were in the green. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Yields on longer-dated Treasuries rebounded in the US session Monday, even as short-end rates remained firmly anchored. That undid some of the curve-flattening that swept across markets after Fed officials last week accelerated their expected pace of policy tightening. Brent oil hit $75 a barrel for the first time in more than two years on signs of a rapidly tightening market. The dollar trimmed some of its slide from US hours. Bitcoin sank closer to $30 000 after China intensified its cryptocurrency clampdown.  Investors are parsing comments from Fed speakers for clues about the outlook for emergency stimulus as the recovery from the pandemic stokes price pressures. The shift in the Fed’s stance on monetary policy has whipsawed the reflation trade that dominated markets this year. Chair Jerome Powell, in written remarks, reiterated inflation had picked up but should move back toward the US central bank’s 2% target once supply imbalances resolve. New York Fed President John Williams also said he continues to view the recent spike in inflation as a temporary phenomenon. Dallas Fed President Robert Kaplan said he favors starting the process of reducing bond purchases “sooner rather than later.” His counterpart from St. Louis James Bullard called it “appropriate” that policy makers opened the taper debate. “There’s probably going to be some back and forth here,” said Tracie McMillion, Wells Fargo Investment Institute head of global asset allocation strategy. “There is a lot of cash on the sidelines right now. Some of that is going to be earmarked to go into the markets, and we think the best place right now to be investing is in the equity markets.” Here are some events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in financial markets: