US and European equity futures climbed Tuesday, while Asian stocks were mixed, as investors mulled this week’s key Federal Reserve meeting. Commodities retreated. Japanese shares gained, while Australian stocks outperformed after a holiday. Chinese equities declined on concerns about liquidity and as metals prices slid led by copper. Gains in technology shares had pushed the S&P 500 to a record Monday, though three stocks fell for every one that rose. The 10-year Treasury yield pulled back under 1.5%, while the dollar was steady. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Bitcoin continued to gyrate amid a barrage of comments, briefly climbing above $41 000 only to pull back. The digital currency got a boost after veteran hedge fund manager Paul Tudor Jones re-endorsed the coin in a television interview.  Investors are awaiting clues from the Fed about a timetable for scaling back emergency monetary stimulus after a pullback in bond yields eased tapering concerns. Expectations are that the central bank will reaffirm the pace of bond purchases this week, even if it delivers projections for interest-rate liftoff in 2023, according to economists surveyed by Bloomberg. The decision is due Wednesday. At some point, “brushing inflation worries aside will no longer convince investors, so we’ll continue to pay attention to what the Fed says about its growth, inflation and policy rate expectations,” Marcella Chow, JPMorgan Asset Management global market strategist, said on Bloomberg Television. Elsewhere, crude oil traded around $71 a barrel. The Australian dollar fluctuated after central bank meeting minutes showed members thought it would be premature to consider ceasing its bond-buying scheme. Here are some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: