Asia stocks and US futures were subdued Monday with investors weighing the pace of economic recovery against more potent Covid-19 strains and central banks mulling stimulus reductions. The dollar edged higher. Southeast Asian markets underperformed, led by Malaysia, where a nationwide lockdown was extended. Australia was little changed despite a lockdown in Sydney to contain outbreaks of the highly contagious Delta strain. Japan fluctuated. Hong Kong dipped in a trading session delayed by a rain storm warning. European futures were little changed. The S&P 500 had its best week since February. Treasuries held losses. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Cryptocurrencies will be closely watched after the UK restricted an affiliate of crypto exchange Binance from doing business in the country. Bitcoin rose for a second day, trading in the mid-$30 000s range in Asia on Monday.  Global stocks are trading near a record high as anxiety about the Federal Reserve’s hawkish tilt eased, with investors dialing back concerns that US policy makers will rush to boost interest rates despite mounting inflation pressures. Volatility receded, with the Cboe Volatility Index, or the VIX, sinking to pre-pandemic levels. Still, markets remain sensitive to more central banks debating the withdrawal of emergency stimulus. “The risk of higher bond yields – and potentially a pull back in equities – due to ongoing strong US economic data remains,” David Bassanese, chief economist at BetaShares, said in a note. “So far at least, long-term bond yields remain contained and equities more focused on the V-shaped rebound in economic growth and corporate earnings.” Here are some events to watch in the markets this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: