South Africa’s government said the liability of the debt-stricken Road Accident Fund, which compensates vehicle-accident victims, has been reduced by more than 90% as a result of an accounting change. The RAF adopted a new accounting treatment for social benefits in the place of the insurance contract approach previously used, Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula said in an emailed statement. This resulted in a decrease of the fund’s reported liability by R305 billion , bringing the RAF liability to R28 billion and the net liability position to R13.5 billion, he said. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Prior to the change the fund’s debts were the government’s biggest contingent liability after those of state power utility Eskom Holdings SOC Ltd., Mbalula said. The RAF is financed by a levy on fuel that equates to almost 13% of the retail price, but its expenses have outstripped its income for years and it is technically insolvent. The fund has merely altered the way it calculates its potential liabilities, but its underlying financial position remains largely unchanged, according to Dawie Roodt, chief economist at Efficient Group in Pretoria. The adjustment will however enable the government to reduce its contingent liabilities and credit ratings companies will then have to decide whether those numbers are credible, he said. The RAF posted a R3.2 billion surplus in the year through March, the first time it hasn’t reported an annual deficit in four decades, according to Mbalula. The adjustment to the liabilities has been independently reviewed by accounting firm PwC, the minister said. The National Treasury and RAF didn’t immediately respond to questions. Other highlights from the statement: