Prosus NV said its e-commerce business grew revenues and shrank trading losses for the year that ended March 31, even as its overall profit continued to be dominated by its investment in Chinese tech giant Tencent Holdings. Prosus and its parent Naspers of South Africa have repeatedly battled questions from shareholders and analysts on the effect of Tencent, owner of China’s biggest messaging service WeChat, with some saying the company’s other businesses were too small to make any substantial difference. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. On Monday the company said revenue at the e-commerce portfolio – which excludes Tencent – grew 46% to $6.2 billion for the year, and its trading loss narrowed to $429 million. “We see… a massive acceleration, and we think it will continue to grow significantly,” said Bob van Dijk, Group CEO, Prosus and Naspers. The e-commerce segment encompasses businesses across the globe in food delivery, online marketplaces, payments, and educational software. “It is positive to see the strong revenue growth in the Prosus e-commerce portfolio, which should help these businesses to reach scale over time,” said Renier de Bruyn, Senior Equity Research Analyst at Sanlam Private Wealth, though he noted they remain loss-making. The company’s Group Chief financial officer Basil Sgourdos said that the value of the e-commerce business was at $39 billion, or 17% of the total value of the company. Prosus as a whole reported a better than expected net profit of $7.45 billion for 2021 on Monday, driven by strong returns from Tencent, which grew profit by 33%. Analysts had seen Prosus net profit at $4.63 billion for the 12 months ended March 31, up from $3.66 billion in the same period a year earlier, according to Refinitiv data. Prosus owns 28.9% of Tencent and is itself controlled by Naspers, Africa’s biggest company by market capitalisation. The companies are seeking shareholder support to move to a cross-holding structure that would shift the bulk of their assets to Amsterdam while leaving Naspers in control. Prosus shares were up 0.75% on the Euronext and Naspers shares 0.22% higher against the broader local index which was which was down 0.42% at 0945 GMT.