Register here. MoneyWeb’s Simon Brown chats with OrbVest CEO, Martin Freeman and operations director, Justin Clarke to find out what is driving the unprecedented demand for medical real estate across the USA, and why so many South African investors are capitalising on the strong rand to diversify their portfolios in favour of stable income-producing commercial real estate in the USA. Find out more about how OrbVest has made it possible to participate in this asset class, normally only accessible to corporate and institutional investors and get an early opportunity to participate in their latest medical office building available in Orlando, Florida, OrbVest’s 33rd medical building. This webinar takes place on Tuesday, June 29 at 16h00. You can register here. OrbVest has built an enviable reputation helping investors from South Africa grow their wealth, with the peace of mind that their investment is underpinned by a robust asset class in key states across America. More on the guests: Martin Freeman
Chief executive officer

Freeman is an experienced entrepreneur with more than 30 years of successful startups. He has a sound reputation of growing companies to large scale in various industries that include financial services and fintech. His focus on strategy and leadership, together with identifying and growing strong executive teams, has culminated in a successful and exponential year-on-year growth in companies throughout his career. He completed an executive management programme at Harvard in 2012.  Justin Clarke
Operational director  Co-founder of Private Property and One Africa Media, Clarke is a leader, investor and mentor in the technology startup ecosystem in Africa. As a founder of Private Property, he lead the company from inception to become the leading internet marketplace for real estate in South Africa. He co-founded One Africa Media in 2012, building it into Africa’s biggest internet classifieds business operating in eight countries with a portfolio of 18 companies. It was recently sold to a Swiss media conglomerate to form Ringier One Africa Media (ROAM.africa). He still owns a real estate company in South Africa and was a property developer in the early 1990s. Register here. Brought to you by OrbVest.