US household net worth rose sharply in the first year of the pandemic, with the poorest half of the country posting the fastest increase in percentage terms — even though their dollar gains were dwarfed by the new wealth flowing to the top. The aggregate net worth of the bottom half of households grew 36% in the 12 months through March, compared with a 33% jump for the top 1%, according to data published this week by the Federal Reserve. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. That translates to $700 billion of extra wealth for the 64 million households that make up the bottom half. Their share of the national total rose to the highest level since 2007 — though it’s still only 2%. By comparison, the top 1% of households — about 1.3 million families — saw their net worth surge by more than $10 trillion in the year through March.  Most of the new wealth at the top came from gains in the stock market. The richest 1% of households held equities worth $20 trillion last quarter, up from $11.5 trillion a year earlier, and their share of overall stock ownership rose to a record high of 53.5%. A nationwide housing boom has been the other big driver of wealth. The top 10% of households now hold real-estate assets worth a net $11.8 trillion (after deducting mortgage debt), compared with $1.4 trillion for the bottom 50%. Broken down by education, college graduates posted the biggest gains but other groups weren’t far behind in percentage terms — except for households headed by people without a high-school degree, whose net worth declined in the period.  The Fed also breaks down wealth holdings by income groups — where the data shows a surge at the top and a squeeze in the middle. The highest 1% of earners saw their share of overall wealth rise to a record high of 26.7%. For the middle one-fifth of the income distribution, the share dropped to 7.2%, a record low. Those trends have persisted since the financial crisis of more than a decade ago. Compared with the second quarter of 2009, the highest earners have added almost 6 percentage points to their share of the national wealth, while the middle-class share has dropped more than 2 percentage points.  © 2021 Bloomberg