Krispy Kreme Inc., the doughnut chain owned by JAB Holdings BV, is seeking to raise as much as $640 million in an initial public offering. The company said in a filing Tuesday that it plans to sell almost 27 million shares for $21 to $24 apiece. At the top end of the range, Krispy Kreme would have a market value of $3.86 billion based on the outstanding shares listed in the filing with the US Securities and Exchange Commission. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Amid photos of doughnuts dripping with sugary glaze and dotted with sprinkles, the company declares in the filing that its purpose is “to touch and enhance lives through the joy of Krispy Kreme.” Since its acquisition by Luxembourg-based conglomerate JAB in 2016, Krispy Kreme has expanded its online presence. Its e-commerce business now accounts for close to a fifth of sales in the US, fueled by its Insomnia Cookies delivery concept. Net revenue for the Charlotte, North Carolina-based chain rose 23% to $322 million in the quarter ended April 4, according to the filing. Its net loss for the quarter shrunk from $11 million in 2020 to $378 000 this year. Krispy Kreme plans to use proceeds from the IPO to pay down debt and buy back shares from certain executives, as well as for general corporate purposes, according to the filing. JAB will continue to own almost 78% of the company’s shares after the IPO. The offering is being led by JPMorgan Chase & Co., Morgan Stanley, Bank of America Corp. and Citigroup Inc. The company plans to list on the Nasdaq Global Select Market under the symbol DNUT.