Asian stocks traded in narrow ranges Wednesday as investors digested data on price pressures to gauge the outlook for stimulus amid the recovery from the pandemic. Ten-year US Treasury yields declined. Shares slipped in Japan and edged up in China, where factory-gate inflation for May was at the highest since 2008 but consumer-price gains remained subdued. The nation is also considering imposing a cap on the price of thermal coal to contain high energy costs. European and US equity futures were little changed after the S&P 500 ended just shy of its May 7 record close. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The focus remains on Thursday’s report about US consumer prices, which may affect views on the likely timeline for Federal Reserve discussions on tapering asset purchases. A gauge of the dollar dipped. Oil resumed its rally to top $70 a barrel in New York. Bitcoin remains under pressure, trading around $33 000 after a retreat this week.  The debate over whether inflation will prove sticky and prompt central banks to pare support earlier than expected remains key for investors. While volatility is evident in the speculative fringe, such as meme shares and cryptocurrencies, global stocks are near an all-time high and Treasury yields have eased for three successive weeks. The overall picture suggests faith in the Fed’s assurances that price pressures will prove transient. “Bond markets all over the world are saying that whatever happens in the headline inflation numbers, central banks are very comfortable that this inflation surge that we are seeing is going to be transitory,” Michael Jones, chief executive officer at Caravel Concepts, said on Bloomberg Television. Here are key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: