Stocks were steady and US equity futures rose Wednesday after comments from the Federal Reserve eased investor concerns that faster inflation would spur policy tightening. Treasuries fell. The Stoxx Europe 600 Index was little changed, with gains in cyclical sectors such as miners and energy shares offsetting a drop in defensives. Contracts on all three US equity benchmarks climbed, after two days of gains for the S&P 500 Index. An advance in Asian equities was moderated by a drop in Japanese stocks. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. A dollar gauge edged higher. Oil climbed above $73 a barrel after data signaling another decline in US crude stockpiles added to a bullish outlook. . Markets are steadying this week after last week’s volatility spurred by the Fed’s hawkish tilt at its meeting. Chair Jerome Powell on Tuesday said the central bank would be patient in waiting to lift borrowing costs, and reiterated that while price increases are bigger than expected, they will likely wane. The Fed’s shift last week to acknowledge higher inflation and pull forward its rate hike projections is “a reflection of more positive longer-term dynamics,” BlackRock Investment Institute strategists led by Jean Boivin wrote in a report. “We believe the Fed’s new outlook will not translate into significantly higher policy rates any time soon. This, combined with the powerful restart, underpins our pro-risk stance.” Elsewhere, commodities including copper and iron ore climbed. Bitcoin rebounded, rising past $30 000. The currencies of Australia and New Zealand retreated as the countries stepped up coronavirus curbs. Sydney will impose new restrictions to fight the Delta variant, while Wellington will move to a higher alert level. Here are some events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in financial markets: