Global stocks extended a record high and US Treasuries were steady amid growing confidence inflation will prove transitory, leaving scope for continued central-bank support. The MSCI All Country World Index was poised for a fourth weekly advance. S&P 500 Index futures were little changed after the benchmark gauge scaled a new high Thursday. The dollar fell for a second day, while gold caught a bid as an inflation hedge. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Faster-than-expected US consumer-price growth for May was largely driven by categories associated with economic reopenings, bolstering the view price pressures may ease later in the year. With the Federal Reserve setting a high bar for reconsidering its dovish stance, the data ended up stoking risk appetite across global markets. “The bond market is falling in line with the Fed’s thinking that inflation is transitory and does not warrant tapering of monetary stimulus any time soon,” said Anu Gaggar, senior global investment analyst at Commonwealth Financial Network.  The US central bank’s view that inflationary pressures are temporary now dominates global markets, signaling any changes in ultra-accommodative policy would happen very gradually. That approach was also reinforced across the Atlantic Thursday, as the European Central Bank raised its inflation forecast and renewed its pledge to maintain faster emergency bond-buying to sustain the euro area. The 10-year US Treasury yield held near 1.43%, its lowest point since early March. The benchmark rate is heading for a 12 basis-point decline this week. European stocks opened higher, with defensive sectors such as telecom and health care leading gains. The Stoxx 600 gauge headed for a fourth weekly increase. In South Korea, bonds extended losses after the central bank chief’s comments on normalising policy added to signs the nation may be among the first in Asia to hike interest rates. Elsewhere, crude oil consolidated above $70 a barrel amid an improving demand outlook. Bitcoin extended its rebound to a third day, trading around $36 700. Later Friday, investors will be keeping an eye on the opening of the Group of Seven leaders’ summit in the UK These are some of the main moves in markets: