Asian stocks and US contracts held steady Friday after robust economic data weighed on Wall Street, fueling concerns about a pullback in central bank stimulus. The dollar extended an advance. Japanese shares fluctuated while China and Australia posted modest increases. European futures were little changed. The US gauges fell overnight but came off lows on signs President Joe Biden may be willing to compromise on corporate taxes. Strong US jobs data and record service-sector growth highlighted the economic recovery. Treasury yields steadied from a climb. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. China’s markets weathered Biden’s order amending a ban on US investment in Chinese companies. The order named 59 firms with ties to China’s military or in the surveillance industry, including Huawei Technologies Co. Gold remained lower after coming under pressure as yields and the dollar pushed higher. The rally in crude oil paused. Meme stocks including AMC Entertainment Holdings Inc. had another volatile US session. Bitcoin fell after a cryptic Elon Musk tweet hinting at a split with the token.  Global stocks are trading in tight ranges as traders weigh the economic recovery against the risk of faster inflation. US payrolls are expected to have added 674 000 jobs in May, according to a Bloomberg survey of economists, and a big miss could stir volatility. St. Louis Fed President James Bullard said the labour market might be tighter than the current unemployment rate suggests. “If the nonfarm payroll numbers tonight were to surprise to the upside, and I’m talking about anything above 700 000, that’s going to keep the pressure on the US fixed income market and definitely very supportive of the dollar,” Eugenia Victorino, head of Asia strategy at Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB in Singapore, said in a Bloomberg TV interview. For market commentary, follow the MLIV blog. The question of the day is whether the upcoming US jobs report will shift taper talk. These are some of the main moves in markets: