Stocks slid Monday and longer-term Treasury yields fell as investors soured on the reflation trade in the wake of a hawkish pivot by the Federal Reserve. The dollar remained at about a two-month high. Japan led the Asian equity weakness, with the Nikkei 225 down as much as 4%, while European and US stock futures declined. The 30-year US Treasury yield retreated below 2% for the first time since February, as the prospect of less accommodative monetary policy buffeted markets. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The Treasury yield curve continued to flatten, unwinding one of this year’s dominant reflation bets. Short-maturity yields surged after Fed official James Bullard said inflation risks may warrant higher interest rates next year, an earlier liftoff than penciled in by many of his colleagues. Gold stabilized after slumping last week. Oil climbed to about $72 a barrel as talks between world powers and Iran dragged on, potentially delaying the return of the latter’s energy exports.  Traders will be paying close attention to this week’s appearances by Fed policy makers, including Chair Jerome Powell, for more guidance on a possible timeline for tapering asset purchases. Last week, officials sped up their expected pace of policy tightening amid optimism about the labour market and heightened concerns over price pressures in the recovery from the pandemic. “We have another possibly two years before the Fed starts to take action,” John Woods, Asia Pacific chief investment officer at Credit Suisse Group AG, said on Bloomberg Television. “So I do anticipate there will be a period of choppy, sideways trading as the volatility associated with this debate in the Fed is reflected in pricing, but absolutely I take the view that yields will tick a little higher.” Elsewhere, cryptocurrencies fell back, hurt by a general worsening of investor sentiment as well as China’s ongoing crackdown on Bitcoin mining and the prospect of tighter regulations elsewhere. Here are some events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in financial markets: