South Africa’s economy is slowly recovering from the impact of restrictions to contain the Covid-19 pandemic, with quarterly expansion beating expectations. Gross domestic product grew an annualised 4.6% in the three months through March from the previous quarter, Statistics South Africa said Tuesday in the capital, Pretoria. That compares with downwardly revised growth of 5.8% in the three months through December and the 3.2% median of 16 economists’ estimates in a Bloomberg survey. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. However, GDP contracted 3.2% year-on-year in the period, the fourth straight quarter of decline and a bigger drop than was projected, which means output is still down from a year ago, when the pandemic started spreading. “South Africa’s first quarter GDP data illustrates the economic bind that the country finds itself in. And we expect this to persist, with the recovery held back for the rest of this year because of the country’s sluggish rollout of vaccinations, even as commodity prices rally.” –Boingotlo Gasealahwe, Africa economist  An imminent third wave of Covid-19 infections that could prompt stricter lockdown measures, a slow rollout of vaccines, electricity constraints and the sluggish pace of structural reforms could weigh on the recovery of the economy that contracted the most in a century in 2020. The National Treasury and the central bank expect output to only return to pre-pandemic levels in 2023.  That will make it even more difficult for President Cyril Ramaphosa’s government to ensure jobs lost as a result of strict lockdowns that halted most business activity in 2020 are recovered. Data last week showed only 15 million people out of a working-age population of 39.5 million were formally employed in the first quarter. That’s 1.4 million people less than before the pandemic hit South Africa. On a non-annualised basis, GDP expanded by 1.1%. The statistics office will drop its focus on the annualised rate starting from the second-quarter release. South Africa’s economy is stuck in its longest downward cycle since World War II. Policy paralysis and weak business sentiment weigh on fixed investment spending, with private-sector companies wary to commit large sums of money to domestic projects. Gross fixed capital formation fell an annualised 2.6% from the fourth quarter. Annualised growth in household spending, which accounts for about 60% of GDP, increased 4.7% in the first quarter. While the quarterly outcome supports BNP Paribas South Africa’s projection for growth of 4.2% in 2021, the “resilience” in household consumption suggests that rate could be higher, said Jeffrey Schultz, a senior economist at the bank. The central bank also expects the economy to expand at that rate this year.