Asian stocks wavered Wednesday after US equities inched lower as the tussle between economic optimism and inflation concern continues to play out in markets. The dollar ticked up. Shares in Hong Kong and China retreated, while Japanese stocks outperformed and robust economic figures boosted Australian equities. US and European equity futures were little changed after the S&P 500 closed slightly lower. US manufacturing data topped estimates overnight but also signaled supply shortages and labour constraints. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Oil reached a more than two-year peak, with OPEC+ providing an upbeat demand assessment and the prospect of a speedy return of Iranian barrels waning. Benchmark 10-year US Treasury yields were little changed. The Turkish lira fell to a record low against the greenback after President Recep Tayyip Erdogan renewed calls for lower interest rates.  Global stocks are looking for fresh catalysts as they hover at record highs. Concerns linger that the recovery from the pandemic will stoke inflation and prompt central banks to pare back policy support earlier than anticipated. Traders await key US payrolls data Friday for a steer on the outlook. “Investors would see a surge in payrolls growth as a sign that the Fed is more likely to move,” said Lauren Goodwin, portfolio strategist at New York Life Investments. Federal Reserve Governor Lael Brainard said there are risks on both sides of monetary policy as the US economy surges ahead while millions of people are unemployed. Here are key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: