A number of Asian stock markets edged back Tuesday as investors await more clues on whether the recovery from the pandemic will stoke price pressures and imperil loose monetary policy. The dollar rose. Shares from Japan to China pared or reversed gains. US futures gave back earlier advances, leaving S&P 500 contracts flat and those on the Nasdaq 100 slightly higher. The S&P 500 was steady near a record overnight, while a rally in Biogen Inc. on approval of its Alzheimer’s drug lifted the Nasdaq 100. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Ten-year US Treasury yields dipped. Traders are awaiting the US inflation report to assess price pressures and expectations that the Federal Reserve is getting closer to starting discussions about tapering asset purchases. Oil extended a decline, losing some momentum after hitting $70 a barrel in New York for the first time in over two years. Digital tokens including Bitcoin retreated, with the Bloomberg Galaxy Crypto Index shedding as much as 10%.  Global equities continue to hover around all-time highs and cross-asset volatility has ebbed, underpinned by the economic reopening from the health crisis and central bank support. But there are concerns about how long the calm can last given that policy makers will eventually pare back stimulus as the recovery builds. Thursday’s US CPI report will be one of the last major economic indicators before the Fed’s rate decision later this month. “We advocate looking through near term market volatility and remain pro-risk, predicated on our belief that the Fed faces a very high bar to change its easy monetary policy stance,” BlackRock Investment Institute strategists led by Elga Bartsch wrote in a note. For market commentary, follow the MLIV blog. Here are key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: