Asian stocks dipped while US and European equity futures were mixed Monday, as liquidity concerns weighed on Chinese shares and benchmark Treasury yields traded around a one-year high. The dollar climbed. Chinese shares extended declines on concern the nation’s economic recovery portends less accommodative monetary policy. Japan eked out a modest gain. S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100 futures fluctuated, while European contracts pointed higher. The S&P 500 closed up Friday, aided by rallies in financial and industrial shares. The Nasdaq 100 slid amid the rotation to value equities. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Ten-year Treasury yields stayed above 1.6% as vaccinations and the $1.9 trillion US fiscal stimulus keep the spotlight on inflation risk in a recovering economy. Australian and New Zealand 10-year rates rose. In Hong Kong, Xiaomi Corp. surged after a temporary halt to a US ban, while Tencent Holdings Ltd. fell on expectations that it faces increased regulatory supervision. Elsewhere, oil climbed and Bitcoin traded around $60 000 after surpassing $61 000 on the weekend in a meteoric rise.  Markets are preoccupied with rising long-term borrowing costs and their implications for reflation trades and the rotation in the stock market from growth to value shares. The Federal Reserve decision later in the week is one of a slew due from central banks globally. While valuations across equities and credit are elevated, it’s hard not to be positive on risk assets, though “the change of pace in markets last week maybe also suggests a lot is priced already,” Patrik Schowitz, global multi-asset strategist at JPMorgan Asset Management, said in a note. Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said US inflation risks remain subdued despite the Biden administration stimulus. A strong recovery from the Covid-19 recession is likely to prompt Fed Chair Jerome Powell and his colleagues to lift interest rates in 2023, but that isn’t going to show up in their forecasts this week, a Bloomberg survey of economists showed. China’s economic activity surged in the first two months of the year. At the same time, the figures showed an uneven recovery with strong industrial output fueled by exports but lagging consumer spending. These are some key events this week: These are the main moves in markets: