Asian stocks rose Tuesday after optimism about the economic recovery drove US shares to record highs. Treasury yields slipped as traders awaited the Federal Reserve’s policy statement for clues about its outlook. Markets saw modest gains in Japan and China, where investors were watching for a possible broader crackdown on the internet sector. S&P 500 futures fluctuated after the benchmark advanced for a fifth session, led by utilities and real estate shares. Apple Inc. and Tesla Inc. helped push up the Nasdaq 100. European futures pointed higher. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Australian 10-year bond yields dropped, following the pullback in benchmark US rates from last week’s highs. Oil retreated and the dollar was steady. Bitcoin slipped below $54 000 from a weekend peak above $61 000.  The market focus is turning to the Fed’s communications on Wednesday, which will include fresh economic and interest-rate projections. Reflation trades stand to benefit if the central bank maintains a hands-off approach to the recent rise in yields. Bets on a faster economic recovery have already helped push one market gauge of inflation to its highest level since 2008, and a renewed climb in yields could spur the rotation from growth to value stocks. “Fundamentally the focus will still be on the growth recovery in the coming months and macropolicy — both fiscal and monetary — will continue to be supportive,” Cecilia Chan, chief investment officer for Asia Pacific at HSBC Asset Management, told Bloomberg TV. Looking further ahead, investors are assessing the potential for an infrastructure spending package and tax increases in the US On the virus front, more European countries suspended the use of AstraZeneca Plc’s Covid-19 vaccine amid concerns about side effects, delaying the European Union’s inoculation campaign. These are some key events this week: