Sovereign bonds extended a rebound, US and European equity futures rose and the dollar dipped Monday, signaling calmer markets after the turmoil sparked last week by a slide in government debt. Benchmark Treasury yields fluctuated around 1.40% and Australian and New Zealand debt rallied. Australia’s 10-year yield slid the most in a year after the central bank doubled down on bond purchases to pacify fixed-income markets. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100 equity futures advanced, while Japan led a bounce back in Asian stocks. On Friday, the S&P 500 slipped and tech stocks staged a modest rebound as Treasuries recovered from a pronounced selloff. Most Group-of-10 currencies climbed. Commodities rose as oil topped $62 a barrel.  Bonds and equity markets have stabilised after central banks from Asia to Europe sought to reassure investors that policy support remains in place. The prospect of faster growth and inflation amid a stimulus-fueled recovery from the pandemic led to concerns that officials will eventually have to contemplate tightening monetary conditions. “With a lot of the move in yields due to the improving growth outlook and reopening prospects, risk appetite is holding up,” said Esty Dwek, head of global strategy at Natixis Investment Manager Solutions. “The pace and scale of the move in yields is more important than the absolute level, suggesting that as long as the move is gradual, risk assets should be able to absorb them.” In the US, President Joe Biden called on lawmakers to quickly approve his $1.9 trillion Covid-19 fiscal aid package, which passed the House of Representatives early Saturday and heads to the Senate. Stimulus and positive vaccine news, including US approval for Johnson & Johnson’s one-shot inoculation, are driving so-called reflation bets. Elsewhere, most base metals rebounded following Friday’s slump. Bitcoin was trading at around $46 000, nursing losses after its worst weekly plunge in almost a year. There are some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: