Growth in South African labour costs continued to slow from a 27-year high in fourth quarter of 2020 as the economy extended its longest downward cycle since World War II. Growth in economy-wide nominal unit labour costs fell to 3.9% from 4.6% in the third quarter, according to the South African Reserve Bank’s Quarterly Bulletin released Tuesday. That was down from the 12.6% high reached in the three months through June, which was likely driven by a data distortion caused by the coronavirus pandemic, the central bank said. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Still, the continued moderation indicates an absence of inflationary pressures emanating from wage increases, according to the central bank. The Covid-19 pandemic and tiered lockdowns aimed at curbing its spread saw the economy contract the most in a century in 2020, with many businesses under financial strain forced to cut workers’ pay. Remuneration per private-sector worker contracted by 1.1% in the third quarter compared with a 5.9% decline in the prior three months, according to central bank data. Similarly, growth in public-sector pay slowed to 1.4% from 3.8% due to the government’s decision not to implement the annual public-sector wage increase in 2020 to curb the large state pay bill, the bank said. The pandemic added to pressure on household finances in 2020, with consumption expenditure shrinking by 5.4%. That’s more that double the contraction induced by the global financial crisis in 2009, according to the bank. The ratio of household debt to disposable income increased to 77.1% last year from 72.9% in 2019. Data published earlier Tuesday showed private-sector credit grew at the slowest pace in more than a decade in February, suggesting that banks remain weary of lending to overburdened consumers. These are some of the other key points from the Quarterly Bulletin: