The Covid-19 pandemic has plunged perennial profit-maker Airports Company South Africa (Acsa) into a R1.47 billion loss for its half-year to the end of September 2020. This is revealed in the group’s latest results, published on Wednesday. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. It comes after Acsa saw a more than 65% nosedive in passenger numbers last year, as global and local air travel came to a virtual halt in the first few months of its new financial year, which started in April. Read:
Acsa faces major losses from Covid-19 fallout
Wings clipped: Domestic airlines weather industry’s worst year Acsa has a monopoly in South Africa, controlling nine of the country’s airports, including the three major international air gateways of OR Tambo International, Cape Town International and King Shaka International. While passenger numbers have improved with the easing of travel restrictions, demand is still being curbed by the pandemic globally. Acsa CEO Mpumi Mpofu notes in an interim results statement that the group is however “in a much better place” than it was in mid-2020. At the time the group faced a cash-crunch and was even in talks with National Treasury about possibly securing state guarantees to help it weather the Covid-19 storm. It seems Acsa has avoided asking government for direct financial support. However, in its results statement there is mention of a new R2.3 billion preference share scheme, in which government (as its major shareholder) has partaken. The group has also asked some of its lenders for covenant waivers or further funding, in addition to embarking on a massive cost-cutting exercise and even selling some of its international investments. Read: ACSA aims to raise $433m by selling stakes, leases “Acsa has strengthened its financial position and secured funding to bolster its liquidity and sustain its business through to the 2023/24 financial year,” the group says in its results statement. In the statement, Mpofu notes that the company’s estimate of three-year funding support that may be required “has fallen from mid-2020 estimates of up to R4 billion to about R600 million only in the 2023/24 financial year”. ‘Most commitments implemented’ “While there is still a great deal of uncertainty about a recovery in air travel, we have successfully implemented most of the commitments we made in response to the impact of Covid-19 and are on track with further measures,” she adds. Acsa’s “core commitments” in this regard include a R1.2 billion reduction in annual operating expenditure and the deferment of infrastructure projects totalling some R14.5 billion. “Capital expenditure up to 2024 is capped at R1 billion a year for maintenance and refurbishment that is required to keep airports operating safely and efficiently,” the group says. According to Acsa CFO Siphamandla Mthethwa, capex projects that are based on assumptions about growth in flights and passenger numbers have been postponed. Read: Airports group ACSA gets new funding, shelves projects He says Acsa’s expenditure levels post-Covid will be 40% lower than pre-Covid budgets. Asset sales Meanwhile, Acsa notes that its funding position has been bolstered by the sale of the company’s 10% interest in Mumbai International Airport for a net R1.27 billion after tax. The group is also currently considering an offer for its interest in Guarulhos International Airport in São Paulo, Brazil. “The company has commenced a process for the potential monetisation of some of its R7.7 billion investment property portfolio. Acsa has also issued R2.3 billion in preference shares,” the group notes. “The preference shares have been taken up by national government in terms of an allocation made in the Second Adjustments Appropriation Act of 2020,” it adds. “Government holds a direct stake of 74.6% in Acsa. The company’s other major shareholder is the Public Investment Corporation [PIC] with a stake of 20%.” Acsa says that the PIC is currently considering taking up the preference shares, while minority shareholders also have the option to take up preference shares. According to Mthethwa, a key benefit of the preference shares instrument is that it is long-dated which provides the company with the ability to roll-up dividends. “This allows the business sufficient space to recover while also guaranteeing shareholders a return on their investment. Further funding initiatives for FY20/21 included securing R3 billion in short-term banking facilities and a loan of R810 million from the Development Bank of Southern Africa,” he says. Debt Acsa received a waiver of financial covenants until June 2022 from major lender Agence Française de Développement (AFD). The group says it expects its debt, including preference shares and funding initiatives for FY20/21, to peak at R9 billion before reducing to R8 billion by 2023/24. “Excluding preference shares, Acsa’s debt is expected to decline to R5 billion over the same period. Over the six years before Covid-19, the company had reduced its debt from R17 billion to R6 billion,” it notes. “The impact of Covid-19 on Acsa revenue and profit has been profound,” says Mthethwa. “Revenue in the first half of the 2020/21 financial year was R685 million compared to R3.5 billion for the same period in the 2019/20 financial year. First half profit in 2019/20 was R125 million with the pandemic fallout leading to a loss of R1.47-billion in the first half of 2020/21,” he adds.