US equity futures fell and Asian stocks were mixed as forced selling and losses linked to a family office took the shine off a record Wall Street close. Oil slid after the ship blocking the Suez Canal was refloated. Shares in Japan climbed despite a record plunge in Nomura Holdings Inc., which warned of a possible “significant” loss that people familiar with the matter said was related to the unwinding of trades by Archegos Capital Management LLC. A gauge of Asia-Pacific shares was modestly higher, and Hong Kong’s benchmark dipped. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. US equity futures declined following revelations that Archegos — the family office of Bill Hwang — was behind a spree of block trades, selling Chinese tech giants and US media firms. Credit Suisse Group AG said it and a number of other banks are exiting positions after a hedge fund defaulted on margin calls. European equity futures were marginally in the green. West Texas Intermediate crude was more than 2% lower after the Ever Given was refloated. It wasn’t clear how soon the Suez Canal would be open to traffic. A dollar gauge ticked higher and 10-year US Treasury yields slipped.  “I don’t necessarily see that we’re going to have a big correction even with these block trades going on in the market,” Carol Pepper, Pepper International chief executive officer and founder, said on Bloomberg TV. “There is not a lot of bad news lurking that’s going to truly cause a major correction at least the next two to three months, therefore your dips are going to be modest.” The strength of the recovery, aided by vaccines, and inflation risks are also front of mind for investors. Later this week, US President Joe Biden plans to unveil a further stimulus program with a tilt toward infrastructure. US-China ties are also in focus, after a report that Washington isn’t ready to lift tariffs on Chinese imports in the near future, but may be open to trade talks. Some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in financial markets: