Absa Bank Kenya on Tuesday reported a 47% drop in 2020 pretax profit reflecting higher impairments due to effects of the pandemic. Kenya’s central bank allowed lenders to provide relief to customers, such as loan restructuring and payment rescheduling, from mid-March 2020 after the first Covid-19 cases were reported in the region. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Absa said pretax profit fell to 5.6 billion Kenyan shillings ($51 million) from 10.8 billion, while impairments rose to 9 billion shillings from 4.2 billion. “The bank’s performance was significantly impacted by a two-fold growth in impairment as customers struggled to keep up with loan repayments due to the economic effects of Covid-19 and pro-active provisioning for an uncertain future,” it said in a statement. “In line with this, the management took a decisive action to increase provisions in order to best position for future potential credit losses.” The central bank said on Tuesday that March 2 marked the end of the period for allowing banks to restructure loans for borrowers hit by the pandemic. Borrowers who still have outstanding restructured loans will have three months until June 3 to regularise them. Absa told a virtual briefing that in 2020 it restructured 62 billion shillings, or 30% of its 103 billion shillings loans in 2020. It said its net interest income rose slightly to 23.4 billion shillings from 23.1 billion shillings. It said it had an exceptional cost of 3.2 billion shillings from 1.6 billion shillings a year before, on account of Absa’s separation from Barclays Bank, which affected its performance.