Truffle Asset Management believes the backdrop for global equities remains positive. Several factors suggest risk assets will continue to do well, including: the extent of fiscal and monetary stimulus around the world; countries gaining a measure of control over the Covid-19 pandemic; a synchronised global economic recovery; growth in company earnings off a low base; and subdued inflation expectations. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. However, CIO Iain Power (pictured) noted during the Meet the Managers event hosted by The Collaborative Exchange that the current market environment is not without risks. ‘Firstly, we think the likelihood of the economy overheating is potentially higher, because we have excessive fiscal stimulus,’ he said. ‘And central banks may be on the back foot when it comes to monetary policy.’ These issues create the potential for a ‘taper tantrum’ similar to the market experience of 2013 should central banks indicate a change in policy. ‘How sustainable is a continuation of negative real interest rates?’ Power said. ‘If it looks like economic reality is going to normalise to pre-Covid levels into 2022, why shouldn’t real interest rates follow suit?’  This presents a challenge to particular kinds of risk assets. ‘These are particularly long-duration assets, whether they be bonds or high-growth equities,’ said Power. ‘The expensive tech shares will be disproportionately negatively affected by rising rates, as opposed to higher-yielding value-type stocks that will not be hit so hard. ‘We have been restructuring our portfolio in order to capture some of that better value.’ However, there is risk here too as value has been hard to find in equities. The table below contrasts the current 12-month forward price-to-earnings (PE) multiple on various indices around the world against their long-term, 10-year median. What it shows is that almost every market around the world is trading on a forward multiple that is more expensive than its historical average.  ‘If you look at the forward PE of the S&P 500 today, it’s just over 22 times and that compares with its 10-year median forward multiple of 16.3 times,’ said Power. ‘So that is about 35% more expensive compared with its long-term history. ‘Europe, in absolute terms, is cheaper than the US at 16.7 times forward, but it is also slightly expensive relative to its long-term history.’ This is one area where Truffle is looking for value. ‘We have been investing in some European cyclicals – cement, oil and financial companies – and have underweighted most of our US equity exposure. We have sold most of those assets because we think the risks to that market are higher given the over-indexing of the high growth tech shares.’ Emerging markets are another area of interest for Power. ‘From an MSCI Emerging Markets perspective, while the multiple is lower, it is still trading at a 36% premium to its long-term median,’ he said. ‘But the absolute multiple is much lower than most developed markets. ‘We predict a much stronger earnings recovery for emerging markets than we do for developed markets, given they are more exposed to the broader economic cycle. We are expecting more than 33% earnings growth for MSCI Emerging Markets, compared with about a 20% increase in earnings for developed markets. So, the PE for the emerging markets universe is going to come down faster than for developed ones.’ One of the few markets around the world that is actually looking cheap relative to its history is South Africa. ‘There is definitely an opportunity in the South African market,’ Power said. ‘Some of our resource companies are getting the benefit of a strong economic recovery and higher commodity prices. Their decent free cashflow yields makes them attractive investments. ‘There are also some SA inc. names that we like – some of the bombed-out domestic companies with good business models are discounting a disproportionate amount of bad news. We have slowly been putting some money into those assets as well.’ This is not, however, a reversal of Truffle’s long-held view that local businesses face severe structural headwinds. ‘The South African economy needs structural reforms,’ Power said. ‘Until we see decisive government action in terms of unlocking our growth potential, we are likely to remain more attractively priced vis-a-vis some of our emerging market peers to the extent that our future growth rates are probably not going to be the same as those in the emerging market peer group.’ Patrick Cairns is South Africa Editor at Citywire, which provides insight and information for professional investors globally. This article was first published on Citywire South Africa here, and republished with permission.