Seasoned crypto investors have known for years that bitcoin sells for a premium, usually 2% to 4%, on SA exchanges compared with overseas ones. Using their discretionary allowance of R1 million a year, and their foreign investment allowance of R10 million, they would buy bitcoin on overseas exchanges and ship them for sale in SA, and pocket that 2% to 4% profit. The only risk was that the price of bitcoin would drop while the bitcoin was being shipped to SA, a process that normally takes a few hours. That premium used to be much higher back in 2017, sometimes going as high as 30%. It was an easy way to make relatively risk-free profits. The premium has dropped in the last two years, but is still attractive enough to attract an army of crypto investors looking for safe, easy profits. All countries with exchange controls pay a premium for hard assets such as bitcoin, the US dollar or other cryptocurrencies such as Ethereum. For example, bitcoin was trading at a 46% premium on the Luno crypto exchange in Nigeria, after the country’s central bank prohibited local banks from dealing with crypto exchanges. Arbitrage gaps like this are exceptional, and often temporary, but there are persistent price differences between countries and even local exchanges, sufficient to make a decent living for thousands of arbitrage scouts looking for risk-free profits. The problem with arbitrage is that it can be technically challenging for most people. To simplify this process and make it accessible to everyone, entrepreneur Jon Ovadia founded crypto exchange Ovex more than three years ago. Ovex partnered closely with a stablecoin called Trust Token USD (TUSD) which is backed 1:1 by the US dollar. A stablecoin is a type of crypto asset fully backed by fiat currency, such as the US dollar. Just as with bitcoin, Ovex clients can purchase TUSD in the US and then sell them at a higher price on the Ovex exchange. The arbitrage gap varies between 2% and 5%, recently yielding a net profit of 2.2% after costs are deducted for the Ovex arbitrage service clients. “Our mission from the start was to take as many risks out of the arbitrage process as possible, and we have done that. People new to arbitrage are often suspicious of any claims of risk-free profits because of the number of scams in the crypto space, but arbitrage has been around for ages, and is nothing new in the investment world. For example, buying a particular stock cheaply on one exchange and selling for a higher price on another.” This is a risk-free profit, something many people find hard to believe. While arbitraging bitcoin poses some risks, chiefly an adverse price move during the couple of hours needed to ship the asset to SA for sale, Ovex eliminates this by extending a line of credit to clients to cover any adverse price move while the TUSD is wending its way to the Ovex exchange in SA. Last month the Ovex over the counter (OTC) desk traded more than R4 billion with clients, having hit the R2 billion mark in October last year. Ovex partnered with Trust Token, a San Francisco-based stablecoin platform with a market cap of over $350 million that allows users to buy cryptocurrency offshore at the international price, without ever having to leave Ovex. When using the Ovex automated arbitrage service all the logistics of shipping foreign currency abroad is handled by Ovex and its partners. “Crypto arbitrage has become an attractive way for people looking for relatively risk-free profits, and this is a market that is only beginning to take off,” says Ovadia. The larger part of Ovex’s business is its OTC desk, which offers institutions and high-net-worth individuals a secure and private channel for arbitrage or purchasing cryptos. Whether the trade size is R500 000 or R150 million, Ovex is able to execute a trade at one price with zero slippage. This is only possible because of its ultra-deep liquidity engine, meaning it has sufficient capital backing and technology infrastructure to be able to execute and settle very large volumes that are often a stretch too far for regular exchanges. Ovex is backed by Invictus Capital, which manages about $150 million in crypto assets. Ovex also recently closed a strategic investment round, valuing the group at over R1 billion according to Alameda research, a Hong Kong-based firm managing over $3 billion and running the fourth-largest crypto derivatives exchange in the world, FTX. The problem with buying large volumes of crypto through most exchanges is that the liquidity is not deep enough to settle the trade in one go, meaning the trade may take hours or even days to fully execute at prices which are all over the place. Ovex has solved that problem by having a financial backer with deep pockets. The exciting news for Ovex customers is that new forms of arbitrage are in the pipeline, including ‘triangular arbitrage’ (where price discrepancies between three different crypto assets present an opportunity for profit) and ‘futures arbitrage’ (where the price between, for example, bitcoin futures and the spot price is wide enough to lock in a profit). The Ovex OTC desk and broker platform enables brokers to sign up their clients and trade on their behalf. Says Ovadia: “We are getting a lot of interest from retail investors as well as brokers looking to make safe profits for their clients. A major benefit we offer for brokers is the ability to open an account on behalf of their clients, which then gives them full access to the user’s account. This means they can deposit, withdraw, and trade with safety. Our platform includes security features such as email verification for sensitive actions like withdrawals. This allows the broker to assist a user with arbitrage trading, or assisting non-tech-savvy users with buying and selling cryptocurrency the same way a broker helps users buy traditional equities.” You can sign up with Ovex or find out more here. Brought to you by Ovex.