Oil resumed gains as investors weighed the implications of a massive container ship still stuck in the Suez Canal after a volatile few days that that saw prices swing wildly around $60 a barrel. Futures in New York climbed 2% on Friday after dropping 4.3% in the previous session. The blockage has led to rising shipping rates and a gridlock of vessels waiting to pass through the vital artery, with efforts to dislodge the Ever Given expected to take until at least Wednesday. Delays freeing the vessel is forcing ship-owners and traders to consider a costly alternative route around Africa. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Oil is still set for a third weekly drop, the longest run of losses since April, on a bearish outlook for near-term demand. US virus cases are rising again and some European countries renewed lockdowns in a setback for the recovery.  The impact on the oil market from the blockage is likely to be muted, however, with crude flows from the Middle East to Europe declining due to a long-term realignment of trade. While plenty of oil is shipped from the North Sea to Asia, it’s usually carried on tankers that are too large to pass through the canal. There are also ample oil-product supplies across the region, with inventories at the major hub of Singapore holding near the five-year average. “There’s a lot of volatility in the market right now,” said Stephen Innes, chief global market strategist at Axi. “Delays in reopening the Suez Canal can add a little bit of support, but the surging virus cases across Europe and the US, that’s going to limit the upside.” Volatility in the oil market has climbed recently to the highest since November and the prompt timespread for global Brent crude flipped briefly into a bearish contango on Tuesday. It’s now back in a bullish backwardation structure — where near-dated contracts are more expensive than later-dated ones. Oil has sold off in recent weeks amid softening physical demand, a stronger dollar and the unwinding of long positions. Despite the recent declines, prices are still up more than 20% this year and there is confidence in the longer term outlook as vaccination rates climb and OPEC+ keeps supply in check. The group meets next week to decide on its production policy for May. © 2021 Bloomberg