Oil rose ahead of reports that will provide a snapshot on global demand and the health of the US economy, rebounding after a sustained slide that dragged prices below $65 a barrel. Futures in New York added 0.7% after losing 1.9% over the past three sessions. A monthly report from the International Energy Agency and a Federal Reserve policy statement are due Wednesday and will follow industry data that showed a drop in US crude stockpiles last week. If confirmed by government figures, it would be the first inventory draw since mid-February. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The market will also be looking for clues on the state of the US-China relationship after high level talks in Alaska later this week.  Despite the recent retreat, oil is still up almost 34% this year as output cuts from OPEC+ members tighten supply and as the demand outlook improves with the rollout of Covid-19 vaccines. Consumption is roaring back in some regions including the US, although parts of Europe are struggling to rebound. “After the run oil has had so far this year, it’s unsurprising to see profit taking on upticks,” said Stephen Innes, chief global market strategist at Axi. “Still, the much improving economic outlook amid OPEC’s determination to have inventories draw is far from over.” The prompt timespread for WTI flipped into contango last week and was 7 cents a barrel in the bearish market structure on Wednesday — where near-dated prices are cheaper than later-dated ones. US producers have bounced back after the cold blast last month, although some refiners are yet to fully resume normal operations, leading to excess crude supplies. The American Petroleum Institute reported US crude stockpiles fell by 1.05 million barrels last week, while gasoline inventories dropped by 926 000 barrels, according to people familiar with the figures. Supplies at the storage hub of Cushing declined. © 2021 Bloomberg