Asian stocks were steady and US equity futures made modest gains Thursday as traders assessed the economic rebound from the health crisis. Oil pared a rally sparked by shipping disruption after a container vessel blocked the Suez Canal. Japanese shares outperformed, while in Hong Kong Tencent Holdings Ltd. and Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. struggled after US regulators revived threats to remove China’s largest corporations from their bourses. S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100 futures edged up after a rotation into cyclicals weighed on the technology gauge overnight. European contracts fell. The dollar was steady. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. West Texas Intermediate crude fell back to about $60 a barrel, having added more than 5% Wednesday. Tugs and diggers are trying to dislodge the ship stuck for a third day in the Suez Canal, a critical waterway for trade. Investors will be on the lookout for the seven-year Treasury auction in US hours, as poor demand for this maturity at last month’s sale triggered a spike in yields. The 10-year benchmark rate crept higher in Asian trade.  Investors are mulling which sectors of the stock market are best-placed to benefit from faster growth, while monitoring the risks of higher inflation. Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen and Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell balanced their positive assessments of the recovery with reminders that it still has a long way to go in a second day of Congressional testimony. “The reflation trade will have further legs to run,” Lale Akoner, BNY Mellon Investment Management senior market strategist, said on Bloomberg TV. “We do see higher inflationary pressures building, higher interest rates and softer dollar to continue.” Meanwhile, the US Securities and Exchange Commission has started an inquiry into the the blank-check company frenzy that’s gripping Wall Street, according to a report. Elsewhere, Bitcoin fell as much as 4.7%, to the lowest in about two weeks. On the virus front, AstraZeneca Plc reported a slightly lower efficacy for its vaccine in a US study. US cases surpassed 30 million, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. Brazil surpassed 300 000 deaths from Covid-19, the second-most in the world. These are some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in financial markets: