JSE-listed Liberty Two Degrees (L2D) and Liberty Group’s landmark Nelson Mandela Square property in Sandton is now home to a giant clock, which overlooks the iconic six metre Nelson Mandela statue in the square. According to the joint owners of the property, which is linked to the Sandton City super-regional shopping centre, the new 5.75 metre (diameter) time piece is the largest clock tower in the Southern Hemisphere. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Despite the impact of Covid-19 on trade, the two groups have opted to invest in the multi-million-rand new attraction at Nelson Mandela Square, which is part of one of Johannesburg’s most visited tourist and shopping precincts. Read:
L2D’s Sandton City back to 85% of weekend shoppers
Sandton City delivers for Liberty Two Degrees Before the pandemic, the Sandton City precinct (which includes the square) attracted around 24 million visitors and shoppers annually. “Nelson Mandela Square’s clock is magnificent; it is the largest engineering feat of its kind in the Southern Hemisphere,” says Brian Unsted, L2D’s asset management executive for the property. “This [new] feature embodies the sophistication of the space and complements the existing architectural design… This project has been particularly exciting as it takes retail property innovation to another level,” he adds. According to the joint owners of the property, the clock comprises diamond hour pieces, translucent numerals with satin black and gold finishes, and LED lighting to create a unique halo while illuminating the clock at night. Image: Supplied “The Nelson Mandela Square clock took 240-hours to design, with most of the elements being fabricated from aluminium, where a total of 47-metres of aluminium welding went into its fabrication,” L2D and Liberty Group note in a statement. “Twenty metres of LED strip lighting was required for the lighting of the clock hands and halo illumination. The diamond hour pieces are illuminated by 96 LED lights, which required 60-metres of pole wiring to accomplish,” it adds. Architecture group Bentel Associates International were briefed on the vision for the project, while Harry Kahn Limited was appointed to deliver the Swiss Mobatime Clock. “The project consisted of the design, engineering, 3D fabrication, laser cutting, manufacturing, welding, and finally, the installation and lighting of the clock,” the property’s owners further point out. The new clock, which reportedly weighs over a ton, also has delicate chimes. It is positioned in an archway in the West Towers building that is situated immediately behind the Nelson Mandela statue, which overlooks the square.