When BlackRock chief executive Larry Fink speaks, the investment world listens. His annual letter to listed companies is the equivalent of Warren Buffet’s annual address to shareholders, as if wrapped in royal majesty. That’s because BlackRock, with almost $9 trillion (close to R138 trillion) entrusted to it, is the world’s largest asset manager. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. In his most recent letter, Fink raises the prospect of active portfolios divesting from companies that didn’t commit to the achievement of net zero carbon emissions by 2050. Included in BlackRock’s $9 trillion of assets under management is $5 trillion in passive investment vehicles, making BlackRock a significant shareholder in many of the world’s largest companies. Where companies didn’t commit to net zero emissions, BlackRock would flag these holdings in both its active and index portfolios for potential exit because “we believe they would present a risk to our clients’ returns”, said Fink. BlackRock is not alone. Fidelity, UBS and Schroders are among the world’s largest asset managers to have announced commitments to the cutting of emissions. But it goes broader than emissions. Fink noted that “companies with better ESG [environmental, social and governance] profiles are performing better than their peers”. They were enjoying what he described as a “sustainability premium”. The language of ESG is usually couched in warmth and goodness, not taunts and harassments. There’s now a game-changer, not necessarily from a sense of social responsibility but more from a hard-nosed rebalance in assessments of risk relative to return. The third investment criterion, suddenly to the fore in SA, is impact. SA’s situation What sets SA apart from the global heavyweights, however, is the tiny size of the domestic investment universe. Divestments simply aren’t on. Perish the thought that ESG counted against Naspers/Prosus, for example, because of a governance concern at a Chinese glamour stock (see Gravy). Perish the manager who withdraws; ditto on discovering that star performer British American Tobacco, automatically in local portfolios, sells tobacco. Try as they might, local asset managers cannot wield the influence of a BlackRock. Few would have the resources for similarly exhaustive research and, as John-Kane Berman illustrates on page 37 here, they’d anyway lack the options to prioritise some ESG factors over others. Their real test, increasingly, will be in the unlisted space where they need not just pick and choose but can also initiate projects for themselves. In the complex welter of ESG metrics, climate change is arguably the most straightforward and simultaneously the most paramount. Fink views it as the key risk for the global economy. He expects a “tectonic shift” in passive investing once more public companies disclose their carbon footprint. This shift in finance won’t occur on asset management’s active side, which is already addressing the issue, but on the passive side after more companies release their mandatory disclosures. He believes this will enable BlackRock and others “to ‘design and democratise’ indices that closely approximate the liability risk but with more sustainable attributes”. Larry Fink, CEO of BlackRock Inc. Image: Simon Dawson, Bloomberg However, it won’t all be plain sailing. Most importantly, Fink recognises that the goal to prevent the world from overheating will not be achieved if only public companies disclose their carbon emissions. By selling these emissions onto private companies, in carbon offsets, there would be only a reallocation of assets rather than a decarbonisation. More than this, there are Financial Times reports in BlackRock’s regular monitors: Allan Greenblo is Editor of Today’s Trustee This article was first published in the March/May 2021 edition of Today’s Trustee, here.