South Africa can only experience real economic growth when consumers have trust in their preferred providers. South African consumers have the right to be offered quality service and products. And, they should be protected and valued at all times. Since March is all about rights and World Consumer Rights Day was on March 15, 2021, it is an encouraging reminder of the various consumer (aka applying-for-credit) rights South Africans already have in place. South African consumers have, amongst others, rights in terms of the National Credit Act (NCA) to: Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. South Africans should ‘shop around’ to get the best terms and rates available when they want to apply for credit. And, consumers should receive a quotation before any credit agreement is accepted. The quotation received, should clearly disclose the fees and instalments involved. Regarding the importance of the examples above, here are a few scenarios consumers can relate to, and by knowing their rights in similar situations will surely come in handy: Buying a vehicle Mrs X wants to buy a car and applies for credit. Unfortunately, her application for credit has been declined. She has the right to inquire why her application has not been accepted and is informed via the credit provider that her credit profile is in a bad state. She disagrees with the given feedback because she knows she is in a position to get financing for a car. Mrs X’s dispute (together with evidence provided) has been logged at the credit bureau and within 20 days receives feedback that the mistake on her profile has been corrected. She can now apply for credit again. Taking out a personal loan Mr Y has the right to ask for a quotation when applying for a personal loan. The credit provider has to disclose all the fees, instalments and necessary terms involved. Mr Y, therefore, needs to ask for the credit agreement (free of charge) to also see what the credit life instalment entails, for example. He has the right to take a look at the credit life premium and can also decide to choose his own credit life insurance provider instead. Although the above scenarios are only a drop in the bucket when it comes to consumers applying their rights while taking out credit, March is the perfect awareness month for South Africans to start getting familiar with their rights. This can also allow them to then manage their debt effectively and accordingly. Over-indebted consumers are encouraged to get the best assistance from skilled professionals to fix their debt sooner rather than later. It is one of consumers’ various rights after all. Carla Oberholzer is a spokesperson and debt advisor at DebtSafe.