Most Asian stocks slipped Tuesday along with US and European equity futures as investors weighed the impact of the recent climb in bond yields and a Chinese official’s warning about asset bubbles. The dollar rose. Shares in China and Hong Kong led the regional decline. S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100 futures turned lower. China is “very worried” about bubbles in overseas financial markets, China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission Chairman Guo Shuqing said at a briefing. Treasury yields were steady. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Guo also said he’s worried about risks in China’s property sector, sparking fresh concerns about further tightening in the world’s second-biggest economy. Oil retreated to trade just below $60 a barrel ahead of a key OPEC+ meeting this week. Metals including copper, silver and gold slid. In Australia, bond yields rose after the central bank left its asset purchase plan unchanged.  Investors continue to debate whether many markets are over-extended following huge stimulus injections to counter the impact of the pandemic. The prospect of faster inflation as the world economy recovers has led to concerns that monetary policy may have to be tightened sooner than expected. That’s pushed up sovereign bond yields this year. “There’s lot of uncertainty, a lot of risks being built in, that’s why you’re seeing a bit of skittishness,” said Lorraine Tan, Morningstar director of Asia equity research. “The positive tailwind for the market is still going to be the global economic recovery.” On the virus front, global cases rose for the first time in almost two months in the past week, the World Health Organisation said, citing countries easing restrictions, people letting their guard down and variants spreading. Bitcoin rallied after a volatile weekend session as Citigroup Inc. laid out a case for the digital asset to play a bigger role in the global financial system. There are some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: