Asian stocks were steady and US futures dipped Wednesday as traders evaluated a surge in the Nasdaq 100 and the outlook for struggling Chinese equities. The dollar pared a drop and Treasury yields held declines. China’s CSI 300 gauge rose modestly after a slump on Tuesday that evaded state efforts to slow the pace of losses. The Nasdaq 100 advanced 4% overnight on a revival of higher-valuation stocks such as Tesla Inc. The move snapped a rotation into value shares based on optimism about an economic recovery from the pandemic. S&P 500 contracts and Nasdaq 100 futures slipped. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Treasury yields steadied below their recent peaks as the first in a string of US auctions went off without disrupting markets. Upcoming sales of 10- and 30-year government bonds will test appetite for the safest debt after last month’s poorly bid seven-year auction sent tremors across markets.  The pullback in Treasury yields Tuesday encouraged investors to wade back into growth stocks, which suffered recently amid concerns about valuations. Longer-term borrowing costs are still up significantly this year on the prospect of faster inflation as economies recover from the health crisis. In China, a report showing surging producer prices highlighted the risk of the nation exporting inflation as factories charge more for goods sold abroad. Upcoming consumer prices data in the US are expected to show a slightly faster annual increase. The rising trend in bond yields is consistent with economic growth expectations, said Lauren Goodwin, portfolio strategist at New York Life Investments. That backdrop still favors cyclicals over defensive assets and “supports equities over bonds, and a weaker US dollar,” she said. The Australian dollar fell after the central bank governor suggested markets may be getting ahead of themselves by pricing in an interest-rate increase within the next couple of years. Oil extended declines as the dollar strengthened, adding more volatility to the market after a mixed industry report on US stockpiles. Bitcoin dipped below $54 000 after reaching a two-week high. Here are some key events to watch: