Asian stocks were mostly higher Friday and US equity futures fluctuated after the S&P 500 Index swept to a record on optimism over the $1.9 trillion US stimulus package. The dollar and Treasury yields climbed. MSCI Inc.’s regional gauge rose a fourth day as Japan rallied amid a jump in Rakuten Inc. on news of an investment by Japan Post Holdings Co. US equity futures were steady following broad S&P 500 gains and a Nasdaq 100 rebound. South Korean e-commerce giant Coupang Inc. popped 41% in its debut. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Chinese shares posted modest gains amid a renewed focus on US-China relations. The Biden administration informed some suppliers to Huawei Technologies Co. of tighter conditions on previously approved export licenses, prohibiting items for use in or with 5G devices. Relatively smooth bond sales this week eased concerns about the market outlook. Yields on the 10-year Treasury benchmark rose to about 1.57% on Friday. Verizon Communications Inc. saw surging demand for its $25 billion debt sale.  “Fiscal stimulus on the upper end of expectations, an improved vaccine rollout, better than expected economic data — everything is coalescing around a much stronger growth out look for 2021,” said Lisa Hornby, head of US multisector fixed-income at Schroders. Markets are now signaling a little less concern that the economic recovery from the pandemic will stoke excessive inflation. Bond yields are below one-year peaks and high-valuation stocks have rallied. The focus turns to Friday’s US producer price data and the Federal Reserve decision next week. On Thursday, the European Central Bank pledged to step up the pace of bond purchases to keep rising yields from derailing the recovery. Elsewhere, oil slipped below $66 a barrel, and Bitcoin traded at around $57 000 after climbing within reach of an another all-time high. These are the main moves in markets: