Morningstar has announced the finalists in the 2021 South Africa Fund Awards. The awards ceremony is usually held in February or March, but there will be no live event this year due to Covid-19. As in the past, the awards are limited to just seven fund categories, based on risk-adjusted performance. There are also two awards for top-performing firms. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. ‘Morningstar selects the finalists using a quantitative methodology with a qualitative overlay that considers the one-, three-, and five-year performance history of all eligible funds, and adjusts returns for risk using Morningstar Risk, a measure that imposes a higher penalty for downside variation in a fund’s return than it does for upside volatility,’ the firm said in a release. Absa Asset Management and Coronation Fund Managers are the only firms to have funds shortlisted in more than one category. This year’s awards also give a significant nod to passive fund managers, with both Satrix and Sygnia listed as finalists in the category for best fund house with a larger fund range. The award nominations are shown below. Best Aggressive Allocation Fund Prescient Living Planet fund Sygnia Skeleton Balanced 70 fund  Best Bond Fund ABSA Bond fund Nedgroup Investments Core Bond fund  Best Cautious Allocation Fund ABSA Inflation Beater fund Select BCI Cautious fund  Best Flexible Allocation Fund Coronation Optimum Growth fund Long Beach Flexible Prescient fund  Best Global Equity Fund Sanlam Anchor Global Equity fund Schroder ISF Global Equity fund  Best Moderate Allocation Fund Discovery Moderate Dynamic Asset Optimiser fund of funds Sasfin BCI Balanced fund  Best South Africa Equity Fund Coronation Equity fund Rezco Equity fund  Best Fund House: Larger Fund Range Coronation Fund Managers Satrix Sygnia Asset Management Best Fund House: Smaller Fund Range Fairtree Kagiso Asset Management Truffle Asset Management Patrick Cairns is South Africa Editor at Citywire, which provides insight and information for professional investors globally. This article was first published on Citywire South Africa here, and republished with permission.