More healthcare workers can expect to receive their jabs at locations within their proximity as more vaccine rollout facilities become available. The Department of Health has identified 13 private hospitals nationwide to be of service for the  programme, but the list is subject to change pending adjustments and the availability of more doses of the vaccine. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The department requires that the chosen sites first vaccinate their own workers at risk of infection, and then those at selected hospitals identified in their catchment areas. The sites identified are listed below. Lenmed Daxina Private Hospital Mediclinic Louis Leipoldt Mediclinic Panorama Rondebosch Medical Centre Bellville Medical Centre Nelson Mandela Children’s Hospital Emalahleni Private Hospital Impala Mine Hospital Rustenburg Medi-Care Centre Pelonomi Private Hospital Mediclinic Bloemfontein Universitas Private Hospital Life East London Private Hospital Lowveld Hospital Life Mercantile Hospital Netcare Garden City Hospital Netcare Park Lane Hospital Wits Donald Gordon Hospital Ascot Park Hospital City Hospital Durdoc Clinic Lenmed Health Shifa Hospital Life Entabeni Hospital Netcare Parklands Hospital Among the reasons for selection was the ability to enable as wide a geographic spread of the vaccine rollout as possible, given the number of untaken vaccine doses, according to a statement released by the Hospital Association of South Africa. Read: SA’s vaccine rollout programme to get R500m boost South Africa is still in Phase I of the vaccination rollout, having inoculated 90 000 healthcare workers nationwide as at March 5. Gauteng leads the pack with over 17 000 vaccinated workers. This is according to a vaccine rollout webinar hosted by Business for South Africa (B4SA), the Department of Health and the SA Medical Research Council (SAMRC) on March 5. Professor Glenda Gray, CEO of SAMRC, says the country still has a long way to go because, in practical terms, only one in every five workers had received the vaccine. The number of vaccinated workers is ambitiously forecast to soar over 1.2 million by the end of March, with a targeted administration of about 120 000 to 250 000 vaccinations per day. Currently, the country is administering 5 000 vaccinations daily. Palesa Mofokeng is a Moneyweb intern.