Stocks slid with US and European equity futures Thursday after a surge in bond yields reignited concerns about valuations. Tumbling Chinese shares led the equity losses in Asia. MSCI Inc.’s Asia-Pacific gauge had its worst drop this week. The technology sector struggled while real estate, finance and energy shares outperformed amid a shift to value segments. S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100 futures dipped but were off earlier lows after an overnight slump in both indexes. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Benchmark Treasury yields edged lower in Asian trading after approaching 1.5% on Wednesday. A market gauge of inflation expectations over the next five years hit its highest level since 2008. Traders also assessed data pointing to a still uneven economic recovery from the depths of the pandemic.  The rise in inflation expectations and long-term borrowing costs is stoking concern that a prolonged rally in equity markets may be in jeopardy. Investors are trying to assess central banks’ appetite to buy more longer-dated bonds to keep financial conditions loose. The focus turns to Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell’s upcoming comments, after Chicago Fed President Charles Evans said the recent climb in yields reflected economic optimism. “Inflation is a concern; there is a lot of money sloshing around the system and it makes sense to have some sort of a correction right now,” said Shana Sissel, Spotlight Asset Group chief investment officer. “And bond yields going up is the market’s implicit way of tightening since the Fed has made it clear they don’t have the intention of doing so.” Democratic leaders in the Senate are working to consolidate support for the $1.9 trillion stimulus bill, which is expected to spur growth. The US economy expanded modestly in the first two months of the year and vaccinations are aiding business optimism, according to the Federal Reserve’s Beige Book. Elsewhere, oil traded near $62 a barrel, with traders focusing on a critical OPEC+ meeting that may see supply curbs eased, while tracking events in the Middle East after Houthi rebels said they hit a Saudi Aramco site with a missile. Some key events to watch this week: These are some of the moves in markets: