Asian stocks pared losses Friday and US futures stabilised as investors digested comments from Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell that fell short of trying to rein in bond yields. Treasuries held a decline. Stock markets dipped in South Korea but edged up in Japan and China, which set a conservative growth target of more than 6% for 2021 that signals more-restrained monetary and fiscal policies this year. On Thursday, the tech-heavy Nasdaq 100 extended its decline to almost 10% from February’s peak, and the S&P 500 erased nearly all its 2021 gains. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Australian bond yields surged in early trade, tracking a selloff in the US 10-year that lifted the yield curve to its steepest point since 2015. Japan’s benchmark yield dropped as the central bank governor quashed speculation that the trading band for the 10-year might be widened. The US dollar strengthened against nearly all major peers. Oil prices leapt after the OPEC+ alliance surprised traders with its decision to keep output unchanged. Bitcoin fell with other risk assets.  Powell noted the recent runup in yields without hinting at intervention, saying that he would be “concerned by disorderly conditions.” While some investors view the rates moves as a sign of economic strength, others are growing concerned about rising inflation and the impact of higher yields on elevated stock valuations. “It makes logical and intuitive sense that Treasury yields should move back up to 1.50% or 2%, but we are concerned with the rest of the market about the speed at which it’s getting there,” said Mona Mahajan, investment strategist at Allianz Global Investors LLC. Meanwhile, the US Senate voted to take up a $1.9 trillion relief bill backed by President Joe Biden, setting off a debate expected to end this weekend with approval of the nation’s sixth stimulus since the pandemic-triggered lockdowns that began a year ago. The February US employment report on Friday will provide an update on the speed and direction of the country’s labour-market recovery. These are some of the main moves in markets as of 2:35 p.m. in Tokyo: