Attacq Limited – developer of the expansive Waterfall City precinct in Gauteng and once the biggest shareholder in European-focused MAS Real Estate – has had no option but to sell a further MAS stake in a deal worth just under R388 million to bring down the group’s burgeoning overall loan-to-value (LTV) or gearing level. The group announced the sale last week to PKM Development Limited, just days before Attacq brings out its latest financial results for the half-year to the end of December 2020, expected on Tuesday morning. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. It comes less than three months after Attacq sold a R500 million stake in MAS to a group owned by the Oppenheimer family. Read:
‘Attractive development pipeline’ a key factor in R500m Oppenheimer investment‘
Despite cash constraints City Lodge opens new Waterfall City hotel This means Attacq has slashed its MAS stake by almost half in the few months. Before the sales, Attacq had a 20.7% stake in MAS, which was valued at around R1.9 billion and made it the biggest single shareholder in the Isle of Man-based group. The sales come in the face of the ongoing Covid-19 economic fallout, which has seen big devaluations of Attacq’s South African portfolio, as well as its rest of Africa and MAS investments. These devaluations have contributed to the group’s LTV ratio hitting 45.7% at the end of its last financial year (ending June 2020). However, with Attacq revealing in a pre-close presentation in early December that it had received an increase in its bank covenant levels from 49.2% to 60%, the group’s LTV may well have worsened. With Covid-19 also causing headaches for Attacq’s planned disposal of its remaining, poor-performing rest of Africa assets (owned jointly with Hyprop), the group seems to have been forced to sell down its MAS investment by more than R880 million in order to bring down its overall debt and LTV ratio. Read:
Attacq hit by R1.7bn SA portfolio devaluation
Hyprop dividend hit by up-for-sale Nigerian and Ghanaian assets Attacq made no mention of plans to sell its stakes in MAS during its last financial results announcement (for the full year ending June 2020). Listed property sector analysts and fund managers, who prefer LTV levels below 40%, will be keenly watching where Attacq’s latest LTV stands when the group releases it interim results. At its pre-close, Attacq said the group’s interest-bearing debt by the end of September 2020 stood at just under R11.2 billion. The group’s main South African property portfolio is valued at more than R20 billion. However, its market capitalisation on Friday was just under R4.8 billion. This shows that the company is trading at a massive discount to its net asset value. The group’s share price lost just over 2.6% on Friday, closing at R6.35. 