Oil declined in Asian trading on concerns about the near-term demand outlook amid the uneven recovery from the pandemic. Futures in New York slipped 1.1% to trade below $61 a barrel after two days of gains. Coronavirus cases are climbing rapidly in India and threatening the economy’s recovery from a rare recession, while in Southeast Asia, demand has hit a plateau and is unlikely to reach pre-virus levels until the end of the year or later. Some European nations are extending or reimposing lockdowns, and in the US, New York City’s mayor urged a pause on reopening. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The prompt timespread for global benchmark Brent crude, meanwhile, is near the narrowest backwardation in about two months. The bullish structure is rapidly approaching a bearish contango, a signal of oversupply.  While oil’s sustained advance this year stalled recently, there is confidence in the longer-term outlook as Covid-19 vaccinations are rolled out worldwide and as the US unleashes significant stimulus. OPEC+ members are continuing to put a floor under prices through a series of output cuts, with the group scheduled to meet next week to determine production policy for May. “There is now no chance that OPEC+ adjusts its production cuts lower next week,” said Jeffrey Halley, an analyst at Oanda Asia Pacific “I had expected a pullback to cull the speculators, just not this deep. In the short-term, I am expecting oil to range with a bias to the downside.” The prompt timespread for Brent was 8 cents a barrel in backwardation — where near-dated contracts are more expensive than later-dated ones. That compares with 67 cents at the start of the month. US crude stockpiles, meanwhile, probably expanded by 1.2 million barrels last week, according to the median estimate in a Bloomberg survey. If confirmed by government data on Wednesday, it would be a fifth weekly increase, the longest run of gains since May. Inventories have ballooned after the cold snap last month shut several refineries, some of which are still attempting to restart. Industry figures are due later Tuesday. © 2021 Bloomberg