The Zondo Commission of Inquiry into Allegations of State Capture commenced with testimony related to the South African Revenue Service (Sars) on Tuesday March 23, with Athol Williams, a former partner of global management consulting firm Bain & Company, as the first witness. This article summarises the main issues arising over two days of testimony. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Bain applies for permission to publish affidavit to counter Williams’s testimony Bain’s legal representative, Alfred Cockrell SC, requested that commission chair Deputy Chief Justics Raymond Zondo grant permission for Bain to publish its affidavit, or a summary thereof, to coincide with Athol Williams’s testimony. Bain was concerned that Williams’s testimony would include “serious inflammatory material”. Bain had applied to cross-examine Williams, but this was still being considered by Zondo. Cockrell argued that if Bain is not allowed to cross-examine him it would be terribly unfair and Bain “will never be allowed to give its version in the public domain”. He intimated that Bain might be “muzzled in perpetuity”. However, Bain hasn’t applied for leave to testify to the commission. Zondo noted that had Bain done so, then its version could have been articulated by its own witness. Zondo opined that any perceived unfairness to Bain in not being allowed to publish its affidavit while Williams is giving evidence would be mitigated by the fact that its version will be put to Williams by the evidence leader. Bain was not granted permission to publish its affidavit. Restructure and dismantling of Sars Evidence leader Alistair Franklin SC briefed the commission that the evidence to be led over the course of the week will cover the institutional dismantling of Sars, that it was weakened and repurposed for state capture. In introducing Williams, the commission was informed that he holds five master degrees from notable institutions including Harvard and Oxford, and is reading for a Doctor of Philosophy from Oxford. Williams deposed an affidavit to the commission in August 2020. Williams left Bain in 2010, after Vittorio Massone was appointed managing partner. Williams was concerned about the way Massone interacted with clients and other people, and contacted the London office with his concern that Massone was not appropriate. Williams doubted Massone’s ethics, whether he was honest, and whether one could trust what he was saying. Bain nonetheless kept Massone in that position – thereby, in Willams’s opinion, endorsing him. Williams was retained by Bain, effective September 2018, to give independent oversight into the investigation of Bain’s work at Sars. The agreement provided for Williams to cooperate with the Nugent Commission of Inquiry into Tax Administration and Governance by Sars. The agreement provided that if Williams’s concerns were not properly addressed he could take them to an independent third party outside of Bain, and would not be in breach of any confidentiality if he did so. Bain had also engaged Baker McKenzie to conduct an external investigation. Williams was to be given full access to the interim and final investigation reports of Baker McKenzie. It transpired that Williams was never given access to these reports. He could thus “make no findings as to the truthfulness of it”. Williams resigned from his engagement with Bain in August 2019. Bain had prior knowledge of Moyane’s appointment In December 2013 Bain had information that Tom Moyane would be appointed commissioner of Sars. Moyane was appointed to this position, in September 2014. From emails written by various senior Bain officials, it is apparent that Bain had attended meetings with former president Jacob Zuma and that it was given assurance that when Moyane was appointed Sars commissioner, Bain would be doing work for Sars. A schedule of meetings held between Zuma and Bain was also presented. Jonas Makwakwa – the deep throat It turns out that Bain was able to give specific advice on Sars to Moyane because it was being given inside information on Sars by Jonas Makwakwa, a Sars executive member. Fabrice Franzen, a senior partner at Bain, reported to the Bain legal division that in 2014 Massone had multiple meetings with Makwakwa on ‘Bait’ (business and individual tax, the largest unit at Sars in terms of tax collection). According to Franzen: “Makwakwa was acting as deep throat, relaying information on Sars to Bain and feeding into Moyane.” Williams’s affidavit included evidence that Franzen had confirmed in his interview with Baker McKenzie that he had drafted the RFP (request for proposal) that Sars would issue to call for proposals from service providers. The RFP describes a comprehensive organisation and strategy review on operational performance and infrastructure. It is mainly drafted in question form, such as ‘Is the IT system adequate?’. Williams commented that this is something one would expect Sars to draft, not Bain. The RFP drafted by Bain provided the reason for appointing an external firm to assist the commissioner in framing Sars’s transformational agenda. The RFP set out the scope of work and deliverables, and the selection criteria in appointing a service provider. It was a so-called “closed tender” which was only sent to a “select group of consulting firms”. Williams voiced his concern: “Bain drafted the ‘rules of the game’ for a public institution.” Zondo has seen this before, noting that Bosasa, in dealing with the Department of Correctional Services, had drafted the RFP to ‘select’ Bosasa as the service provider. Sars issued the RFP for a six-week contract in December 2014. Bain was awarded the contract in January 2015. Williams alleges that Bain, with the assistance of Makwakwa and Moyane, managed to extend the period to 27 months – without going back to the market to tender. Evidence leader Franklin read from Bain’s submission: “We accept that through various lapses in leadership and governance, Bain South Africa became an unwitting participant in [a] process that inflicted serious damage on Sars.” According to Williams, based on the evidence he has seen: “Bain did not arrive as unwitting participants; they had a restructuring agenda.” Williams emphasised that he has merely given his interpretation on a set of documents that he had received from Baker McKenzie.