Rob Shuter’s four-year stint as MTN Group CEO turned out to be a fairly grim period – for him as well as the company and its shareholders. Not only did those with a stake in the company miss out on an interim dividend in 2020, the final year of his tenure, the board also opted to skip the final dividend for that year. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read: MTN adds 29m customers but suspends full-year dividend
Listen/Read: MTN has a ‘pretty solid’ reason for not paying a dividend this year And throughout most of his four years the share price was on a generally downward trend, reaching a Covid-induced low of around R30 in March 2020. Fortunately the share price has recovered in recent months. It’s a recovery the group is expected to sustain for the foreseeable future, assuming no more gremlins crawl out of the woodwork in its riskier markets. Certainly, the group is in a far stronger position at the end of Shuter’s term than it was at the beginning. MTN ‘remains attractive’ As Anchor wrote in a note on MTN’s annual results, the dividend news was disappointing but the group provided a “confident outlook” for growth as well as the execution of “several of the material value-unlock transactions over the balance of this year”. It concludes that the investment case for MTN remains attractive at current share price levels. Not a hugely exciting outlook, but perhaps better than what has faced shareholders for several years. This may explain why there hasn’t been much of a fuss about last week’s revelations that Shuter’s remuneration package in 2020 was a hefty R73.8 million. Or it could just be that everyone is now inured to the practice of rewarding executives huge amounts of money, particularly when it comes to MTN. From day one this cellphone operator has never scrimped on executive pay, no matter what disaster befalls the company. Package breakdown In addition to his R18 million guaranteed package in 2020, Shuter received ‘other benefits’ of R17.8 million, R30.1 million of bonuses, post-employment benefits of R2 million and share gains of R5.7 million. The ‘other benefits’ reflect the payment of cash-settled share-based incentives involving 327 214 shares. These share-based incentives were awarded to Shuter as a sign-on bonus back in March 2017 when he was head-hunted from Vodafone Europe. They had a three-year vesting period and were paid out at the March 2020 share price of R54.39. Read: Shuter’s MTN sign-on bonus cobbled by weak share price At the time the MTN shares were awarded as a sign-on bonus they were priced at R125 each, putting a value of R41 million to this bonus. This means Shuter got less than half of what he might have expected from the sign-on bonus. Ralph Mupita, who joined MTN as CFO at around the same time Shuter was appointed CEO, did considerably better with his sign-on bonus, which had a shorter vesting period. Ralph Mupita, former CFO and now CEO of the group. Image: Moneyweb Mupita was awarded 446 027 MTN shares a month after Shuter; they were paid out in October 2019 when the MTN share price was R94.28 – giving him a bonus in 2019 of R42 million. This bonus bumped up Mupita’s 2019 remuneration package to R66.3 million. For 2020 the former CFO, who moved into the CEO slot on Shuter’s departure, was paid R30.8 million. Dividend-deprived shareholders may be less inclined to accept generous remuneration packages. This may mean that Mupita will have to deliver persuasively on the group’s new ‘Ambition 2025’ strategy if he is to avoid pushback from shareholders.