Deputy Finance Minister David Masondo says the future of Operation Vulindlela is unknown, however, the unit is working on how best to be institutionalised within government departments. Operation Vulindlela is a joint policy unit between the National Treasury and the Presidency that is aimed at galvanising the government to implement much-needed structural reforms in order to grow the economy. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Its main priorities include stabilising electricity supply, reducing the cost of digital communications, ensuring sustainable water supply, improving competitive pricing and service quality in freight transport, and ensuring that the country implements a visa regime that attracts skills and grows tourism. Read:
Structural reforms: Some progress
Positive reform moves from government The unit, which was established by President Cyril Ramaphosa last year, does not have any implementation powers. It is rather focused on monitoring and reporting on the progress made on reforms as well as making recommendations where necessary. Speaking at a media briefing on Monday, Masondo says the unit anticipates that some “vested interests” may delay the implementation of the reforms. Vested interests threat Masondo steered clear of mentioning any specific “vested interests” which have delayed implementing reforms, but gave an example of a community in a municipality where the vested interests have “captured” the municipality with the help of officials. Masondo explained how the government has been unable to roll-out much-needed water infrastructure in the unnamed municipality because the local interests in that community benefit financially from water tanks that are delivered to provide temporary water solutions. “When you undertake any reform, you are already upsetting existing interests and the question [becomes] how do you negotiate the transition,” he said. The government has also experienced stumbling blocks in the roll-out of sufficient spectrum to meet demand. The Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa) has been interdicted by Telkom from rolling out the spectrum auction planned for later this month, pending a hearing of the issues raised in opposing the process. “Icasa was interdicted and we have been slowed down…. You can escalate the matter to the president but you also have to find ways to resolve matters with business and industries,” he said. Read: Regulator’s approach to spectrum auction was unlawful, court says Politics at play Head of the Vulindlela Unit at the National Treasury Sean Phillips added that the delay in implementing the reforms arises when reforms are approved at a “higher level politically” but are then delayed because there are differences between stakeholders on the detail of implementation. “For example, there has been a political agreement to increase the roll-out of Independent Power  Producers (IPP) and improve electricity generation…but in the technical detail of that one of the issues that we found – which were quite contentious – is whether raising the licensing threshold for embedded generation would be a good way of achieving high-level political objectives,” he said. “There is a lot of contention around that [specifically]: whether municipalities and Eskom are ready to cope with a lot more distributed generators coming in and going off the grid because they will largely be using renewable energy.” Head of economic policy at the National Treasury Duncan Pieterse said the successful implementation of the reforms is expected to strengthen the economic recovery, inspire investor and public confidence, and improve South Africa’s growth trajectory. From a low base of -7.2% in 2020, Treasury expects the economy to rebound by 3.3% in 2021, followed by 2.2% and 1.6% in the following two years, respectively. Read: SA economy contracts 7% in 2020 “Operation Vulindlela will likely lead to a much better growth profile over the short- to medium term according to our baseline scenario [ as outlined in the 2021 Budget Review],” he said. The National Treasury has modelled two scenarios in addition to the baseline forecast. Source: 2021 Budget Review