The second round of cross-examination of Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan by Advocate Dali Mpofu, representing former South African Revenue Service (Sars) commissioner Tom Moyane at the Zondo Commission, was once again characterised by the repeated trading of insults and interjections of counsel on both sides. Gordhan was previously cross-examined by Mpofu at the Commission of Inquiry into Allegations of State Capture in December, where the pair threw consistent jabs at each other regarding Gordhan’s 2018 testimony to the commission, which implicated Moyane in state capture. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read: Accusations and name-calling as Mpofu cross-examines Gordhan The drama-filled, three-hour long Tuesday sitting reached a crescendo when Mpofu told Advocate Michelle Le Roux, who was representing Gordhan, to “shut up” during Le Roux’s re-examination of the minister. This was after Le Roux asked Gordhan how he felt about being called a racist by Moyane, to which he responded by saying that he had addressed the accusations already. While standing up, Mpofu requested to raise an objection to Gordhan’s response to Le Roux question. “Chair I’m on the floor…this cannot be happening for the third time. Ms Le Roux must shut up when I’m speaking…you too Mr Gordhan,”Mpofu said. Responding to Mpofu’s outburst, Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo said: “Mr Mpofu I’m in charge here, please sit down.” Zondo then gave Le Roux an opportunity to explain her previous question to Gordhan and further allowed Mpofu to speak. During his testimony at the Zondo Commission in 2018, Gordhan accused Moyane of using his position as the Sars commissioner to advance state capture, leading to the gradual deterioration of the entity. Gordhan said Sars’s revenue collection decreased during Moyane’s tenure, adding that the entity lost key professionals who did not want to be associated with what was taking place at the company. Read:
Ramaphosa suspends Sars head Moyane
Moyane’s Sars review was Gupta-linked – Gordhan The accusation was echoed by Athol Williams, a former employee and consultant of Bain & Company. Williams testified at the Zondo commission on Tuesday prior to Gordhan’s cross-examination. He told the commission that Moyane and the US-based consultancy company strategised to “capture” Sars under the guise of developing a new operating model for the revenue service. When asked by Mpofu on Tuesday whether he reported Moyane to any law enforcement authorities regarding activities related to state capture, Gordhan admitted he had not. Gordhan was finance minister during Moyane’s tenure at Sars. During his cross examination of the public enterprises minister, Mpofu relied on two court judgements, which contained adverse findings against Gordhan, to show that the minister often made “scandalous” and “vexatious” comments regarding various individuals without providing evidence. Mpofu pointed to a high court judgement in December last year which set aside Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane’s report which found that Gordhan had acted irregularly when he approved the early retirement of former Sars deputy commissioner Ivan Pillay with benefits in 2010. Although the judgement cleared Gordhan of wrongdoing, it found that he publicly made adverse comments regarding Mkhwebane. Mpofu used the judgment to accuse Gordhan of having a “propensity to insult people in a vitriolic, scandalous manner without evidence,” which Gordhan denied. Noting the comments made in the judgements regarding his comments about the public protector, Gordhan said: “ I ask the chair to note the outcomes of these judgments which were quite damning against the public protector”. The inquiry continues on Wednesday with more Sars-related testimony expected to be heard.