 NOMPU SIZIBA: Power utility Eskom released its latest state of the system report today (March 15, 2021). At the briefing CEO André de Ruyter announced that most Eskom power stations had coal supplies averaging 51.7 days, while none were below the required 20 days. He also expressed regret that load shedding continues in the country.; (it’s) scheduled to go on until Wednesday. But the combination of planned and unplanned power outages remains quite high and could result in further load shedding. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Well, to give us an overview of some of the key issues at Eskom right now, I’m joined on the line by Phillip Dukashe, acting group executive for generation at Eskom. Thanks very much, Phillip, for joining us. Now, Eskom spokesperson Sikonathi Mantshantsha said earlier today that there are some 12 900 megawatts of power that are out on unplanned maintenance and breakdowns, while there’s a further 6 500 megawatts that are out on planned maintenance. Why is Eskom struggling to get on top of its supply situation? PHILLIP DUKASHE: Those figures will change a little bit. It’s slightly lower. But I think the major reason why we are struggling is that in many cases, we are trying to play catch-up on maintenance. In the past these stations have been run very hard and you will see also that we’ve pulled back somewhat on maintenance. At this stage we have a backlog of maintenance that we are trying to catch up on, and that is why we are still focusing on high planned maintenance. A figure of 6 000 megawatts is relatively high for planned maintenance but, if we do not do that, we know that we’re going to create more problems for ourselves in the future. NOMPU SIZIBA: It seems that Eskom has now got a better handle on its coal supplies, and we don’t hear so much about wet coal any more. So when the power stations are running well, presumably that’s not going to be an issue going forward. PHILLIP DUKASHE: Yes. The good performance on wet coal was actually part of the plan that has really delivered the results. We focused on the period when the rainfall is high, and we have put plans in place to try and manage and make sure that we don’t have wet coal issues. Now, despite the heavy rain, higher than normal in January and February, I think it was pleasing to see that, although there was the impact of rain, it was not as extensive as it was in previous years. That was encouraging. We certainly will be building on that. NOMPU SIZIBA: With ageing members of the Eskom power station fleet, if I can put it like that, is there a level of frustration perhaps at how slowly alternative energy sources are coming through, because presumably they could make a material difference in terms of whether we get load-shed or not? PHILLIP DUKASHE: That is true. I think our group chief executive mentioned today, and I think the president of the country has also mentioned, that we currently have a shortfall of about 4 000 megawatts. That makes it difficult as well for us, although we are trying to push planned maintenance; but it has to be measured because we know that load shedding is not something that we want to go to. So, certainly, if we were to get alternative energy, irrespective of what it is, that would make a big difference, and we’d certainly be able to avoid load shedding. NOMPU SIZIBA: Phillip, what’s the update on Medupi and Kusile? When will these plants be finally completed? PHILLIP DUKASHE: The completion is nearing end. At Medupi we’ve five units already in commercial operation. And if the target is met the next, the final unit – which would be unit one at Medupi – should in the next few months go commercial. Then Kusile is slightly behind. We’ve two units in commercial operation and we’ve a third unit, in this case unit three, which is also undergoing its final testing in preparation for commercial operation. That will leave three units out of the whole fleet of 12. It needs concentrated work to try and accelerate and try to improve delivery on these units, and I think in the coming months that will certainly yield results. NOMPU SIZIBA: Your CEO, André de Ruyter, has expressed regret that load shedding continues, even as we speak. Do you think that as we approach the winter months we can expect perhaps even more intense load shedding in terms of the stage? PHILLIP DUKASHE: We are hoping actually for less load shedding, and the reason for that is that part of the planned maintenance we are doing now is to prepare for winter. During winter we certainly cut back on planned maintenance so that we can have these units available. We’re also hoping that some of these units that are now on planned maintenance, when they come back, will be more reliable. And then [there are] other factors. During summer we battle with what we call partial load losses: units that are synchronised are generating, but they are not able to deliver at full load. Some of that is weather-dependent. During winter it is much easier, so load losses are reduced. And in fact, just looking at the numbers, we are able to reduce our partial load losses by up to a 1 000 megawatts during winter. So all of these things, we are hoping, will give a much more reliable system during the winter months. NOMPU SIZIBA: Does this mean that you’re using the OGCT system, and that you’re spending a lot of money in order to fill the gaps in terms of supply? PHILLIP DUKASHE: Unfortunately, yes. NOMPU SIZIBA: Please expand on what OCGT [open cycle gas turbine] is, because I’ve just forgotten and the listeners will want to know, PHILLIP DUKASHE: Okay. OCGT, in simple terms, is burning diesel. It is open cycle gas turbines. This is a much more expensive form of generating electricity. We would like to keep the use of OCGTs low, because they are part of our reserves or part of our backup that we should use in emergencies. Currently the load factor is about 5.6%. We would like to keep it at 1%. So you can see from this that we have really made use of OCGTs at this stage. At the end of February we burnt or we’d used about R3.2 billion worth of OCGTs. NOMPU SIZIBA: That was Phillip Dukashe, acting group executive for generation at Eskom.