While Standard Bank warned shareholders a few weeks ago that earnings for the year to December 2020 would be as much as 50% lower than in the previous financial year, the figures were still shocking. In particular, the huge increase in provisions for bad and doubtful debt were enough to give shareholders the chills. The results however show that the banking group actually performed quite well during an extremely difficult year. The underlying banking operations remained robust with modest growth in deposits and lending, while net interest income and non-interest revenue were only marginally lower than in 2019. Operating expenses were well contained and increased only 1% compared to a year ago. Important income statement items Source: Standard Bank results for the year ended December 31, 2020 The slight decrease in banking income and the drop of 36% in income from investment management and life insurance activities (a decrease of R8 billion) left total income some 8% lower at R123.7 billion compared to R134 billion in the previous financial year – still a credible performance in a difficult year. Then the shock: provisions for bad and doubtful debt increased from less than R8 billion in 2019 to more than R20 billion in 2020. This is some 2.6 times more than in 2019, which was already a difficult year for consumers. The huge increase in provisions was the major reason behind the fall of 53% in pre-tax profit from R43.8 billion to R20.9 billion. Chief financial officer Arno Daehnke told shareholders in a presentation of the results that the figures reflect the very difficult operating environment. Clients under pressure “Covid-19 placed considerable strain on our retail, business and corporate clients, particularly in SA,” said Daehnke. “While our results reflect the extremely difficult operating environment, [they] also reflected our resilience,” he added, noting that lower activity levels due to lockdowns impacted on revenues. Figures show how Standard Bank’s personal and business banking cluster suffered under the difficulties brought on by the Covid-19 pandemic and the consequences of the restrictions placed on economic activity and freedom of movement. “Lockdowns disrupted businesses and impacted client liquidity positions. The temporary client relief granted provided some respite, but the delayed economic recovery was evidenced in customer repayment profiles and the requirement for client relief extensions,” reported management. “This, combined with the deterioration in macroeconomic assumptions and proactive provisioning, drove higher provisions and credit impairment charges.” Daehnke said the stress experienced by clients can be seen in the huge increase in credit impairment charges in the personal and business banking division. These increased to R15.9 billion compared to R6.4 billion in the previous financial year. A note to the results show that Stage 3 provisions, the worst of the bad debt, increased the fastest. As a result, headline earnings in the personal and business banking division fell by a massive 62%, from R16.5 billion in the 2019 financial year to less than R6.4 billion in the year to December 2020. Bank’s response However, Daehnke said the group’s strong capital position enabled it to respond quickly to the challenges of the pandemic by offering billions worth of relief to clients, as well as significantly changing the way Standard Bank is doing business. An analysis of operating expenses bears out the latter point. Employee costs remained largely unchanged compared to the previous year, while spending on technology increased by nearly 26% year on year. Over the last four years, staff costs increased by an average of 3% per annum, while spending on technology increased by 13% per year. “The group expanded and enhanced various digital service solutions to enable our clients to continue to transact and our employees to continue to operate productively during enforced lockdowns,” reflected management. “Pleasingly, these efforts were reflected in improvements in client satisfaction and retention, and growth.” Standard Bank noted that online and mobile transaction volumes increased 29% in SA, comprising 99% of total transactions in 2020. In other African countries, digital volumes increased 27% to reach 95% of total transactions. “Physical transactions have not fully recovered to pre-Covid-19 levels,” according to the commentary to the results. “Branch transactions in SA and Africa Regions declined 44% and 29% respectively, year on year.” Rest-of-Africa growth Daehnke made interesting comments on the group’s diverse client base, noting that while headline earnings declined 72% in SA, businesses in the rest of Africa grew headline earnings 9%. “The Africa Region’s contribution to banking headline earnings increased to 58% of the total,” he said. Thus, the operations in Angola, Ghana, Kenya, Mozambique, Nigeria and Uganda were the largest contributors to Standard Bank’s headline earnings. The net result is that Standard Bank reported headline earnings of R10.03 per share, 43% lower than the R17.67 of 2019. Return on equity took a severe knock, falling from 16.8% to 8.9%. However, Daehnke warned that while Standard Bank expects the global economy to rebound, the possibility of further Covid-19 infections are a real possibility and that recovery in earnings will take some time. It seems investors see the low earnings as temporary, with the current share price of above R142 reflecting a price-earnings ratio of above 14 times, compared the average of around 10 to 11 times over the last few years. Consensus forecasts published by Bloomberg before the announcement of the results indicate that the numbers were a bit better than expected. The average estimate was for earnings of around R9.60 per share compared to the actual earnings of just above R10. Read: Standard Bank declares full-year dividend Of interest is that analysts expect earnings to recover by at least 30% in the current financial year to above R13 per share. A similar poll by MarketScreener estimates that earnings wil increase to more than R17 per share in two years’ time.   Source: Standard Bank  Download PDF 