Oil was steady below $70 a barrel in London with the demand recovery remaining patchy across the globe and a stronger dollar curbing any price gains. Indian sales dipped in February amid higher pump prices, but demand has been climbing in the US and the UK. A fresh bout of volatility in bond markets and a rising dollar added bearish pressure on crude. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership.  The global Brent benchmark started this week with a push above $70 after attacks on Saudi Arabia’s oil infrastructure, before retreating. The market is facing opposing forces from OPEC+ holding output steady and higher prices potentially encouraging a surge in US shale production. “We’ve tested the $70-$72 resistance for Brent, and that level held pretty well,” said Hans van Cleef, senior energy economist at ABN Amro. “I’m still cautious for a serious downward correction.” The availability of crude, meanwhile, remains tight due to the OPEC+ curbs. Some refiners in Europe and Asia will get less crude than they asked for next month from Saudi Arabia as the producer extends its unilateral output cuts. Three processors will receive almost 20% less supply than requested. The prompt timespread for Brent was 61 cents a barrel in backwardation — a bullish market structure where near-dated prices are more expensive than subsequent months — compared with as little as 45 cents earlier in the week. OPEC on Thursday sounded a note of caution on the outlook, trimming its forecasts for the amount of crude it will need to pump over the next two quarters. All eyes will be on next week’s International Energy Agency demand forecasts. Investors will also be watching for clues on the health of the US-China relationship following a high-level meeting set for March 18-19 in Alaska. © 2021 Bloomberg