The Section 12J sunset clause has been a trending topic following the finance minister’s budget speech in February, in which he announced that the incentive will not be extended beyond June this year. Read: End of the road for Section 12J (Feb 24) Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. This came as a huge surprise to the Section 12J industry, largely because the Section 12J Association conducted a survey that reflected over 15 000 jobs were created and supported, and over R4 billion has been invested into more than 300 small, medium and micro-sized enterprises (SMMEs) in South Africa. One would have assumed that these statistics would have been enough to support an extension of the incentive. Read: This is how Section 12J projects benefit SMEs (Jun 2020) National Treasury undertook its own survey, and the outcome demonstrated that National Treasury and the Section 12J Association reached consensus on one fact only – namely that of the more than R11 billion invested in Section 12J investments, approximately R4 billion was reinvested. That leaves roughly R7 billion of capital sitting idle in cash. ‘Travesty of justice’ From National Treasury and SMMEs’ perspectives, this is a travesty of justice, particularly given the difficulty SMMEs have had in accessing equity funding, over and above the impact of Covid-19. As an industry, had more capital been invested in SMMEs, then the argument for an extension would have been far more convincing, as one would assume that the job creation numbers would have been significantly larger, tax revenue collected from the SMMEs would have been significantly higher, and so on. It is therefore no surprise that National Treasury’s statement read that “the incentive has not adequately achieved its objectives”. How could it, given that over R7 billion of capital has failed to be invested into the SMME market? As a role-player in the industry, I am of the view that the failure by the industry in having not adequately deployed the capital raised is the main reason for the incentive not being extended. This is not a new issue. Those of you who have read my opinion pieces over many years will note that lack of deployment is an issue I raise regularly. National Treasury is also somewhat at fault During one of the most recent amendments to the legislation, it extended the time period in which Section 12J fund managers could sit on capital to four years. One would have thought that given the historic deployment issues, Treasury would have had the sense of mind to rather reduce the time period as opposed to extending it. Fortunately, the non-extension has no material impact on taxpayers who have taken up the incentive and who intend to invest before the end of June 2021. This simply means that taxpayers have a limited window (before the end of June), to take advantage of the “generous tax deduction” (National Treasury) for the 2022 tax year-end. Two important notes for prospective investors Taxpayers who intend to invest before the end of June should have a firm understanding of the amount of capital under management by the fund manager, and what percentage of that capital is sitting in cash. Read: The ‘fund’amentals of Section 12J investing The first point is extremely important. Many taxpayers will find themselves investing in Section 12J investments where the total capital under management is insufficient for the fund manager to cover its costs, as most fund managers are reliant on an annual fund management fee, which is generally a percentage of total capital under management. The second point is as important as the first. Investors who invest in Section 12J investments with high weightings in cash investments (in other words, low deployment rates) are, in my view, going to see very poor returns as their capital will be at the back of the queue and remain in cash for far too long to generate a reasonable return (if any). In addition, these investors will likely struggle to exit investments on time. To close, my prediction is that the non-extension of the incentive will result in the largest cumulative investment by taxpayers in a single year. A taxpayer who understands Section 12J will realise that the incentive is extremely generous and, if invested wisely, investments can achieve excellent returns across the various investment risk profiles. Jonty Sacks is a partner at Jaltech Fund Managers.