Investec has identified the surge in fibre networks as one of the top growth industries in SA and, as is Investec’s style, has opted to back leading companies in this space with strong management teams. This is the take-away from an interview with Lourens Campher, head of Asset Finance at Investec. “Growth in connectivity is one area that benefitted from the Covid-19 pandemic,” says Campher. “It was growing fast before, but we are currently seeing enormous growth as people started to adapt to a new lifestyle.” We have all experienced it. Not only did more people start working from home – and a large percentage will continue to work from home in the future, or in part from home – but online learning for scholars and students became the norm within a few months. In SA, online learning in particular can become the solution to the serious problems of inadequate schooling and limited space in universities. In addition, the trend towards home entertainment and online shopping has accelerated. All of this has resulted in an increased demand for connectivity and data. “The big players in fibre networks are all busy expanding to take advantage of the growth, connecting more South Africans,” says Campher, dubbing the expansion a “land grab”. “You need to be first in the neighbourhood to get a competitive advantage,” he adds. “The first company to install a network will sign up the first wave of subscribers and will be the one that is able to earn the required return on investment to justify the significant capital investment.” Financing Unfortunately, it is a very capital-intensive business. Installing a new fibre network requires a lot of money upfront. Operators need to obtain way-leaves, dig trenches, lay many kilometres of expensive fibre-optic cable, and install all the related high-tech equipment. Then it takes time to sign up subscribers. Campher says the large capital outlay, and the relatively long time to build up the required subscriber base to break even and eventually reach profitability, makes financing extremely difficult for companies in this relatively new industry. “Equity is a very expensive source of financing as investors would expect outsized returns for an investment of this nature. Supplier financing, although the least expensive option, isn’t suitable due to the long time period required to install and mature a network. The solution “It obviously takes much longer to sign up the required subscriber base that [will] generate sufficient operating cash flow for expansion,” says Campher. He adds that bank financing, balanced with equity, is the solution. “Investec has built up strong expertise in this fast-growing industry. Over time, we have developed a unique formula to unlock capital for fibre companies by supplying debt to grow networks. “Basically, we are willing to go further when the right company with the right management comes along,” says Campher. Investec recently assisted MetroFibre Networx, a leading SA open access fibre network operator, in raising R2.5 billion in debt, of which Investec opted to fund R1.25 billion. MetroFibre is a private company owned by management, private investors and local institutional investors such as Africa Infrastructure Investment Managers, Sanlam Private Equity and African Rainbow Capital, as well as the French investment group STOA Infra and Energy. Compelling proposition “Fibre networks are critical. It is important for the economy, as well as the community,” says Campher. “Investec took a strategic decision to increase its investment in and exposure to the fibre industry. We back the right company with the right management team.” “Fibre networks make sense in all aspects,” he adds. “It is the best option for connecting to the internet in densely populated areas, it contributes to economic growth, creates jobs and improves society overall. “In SA, a good fibre network is as good as anywhere else in the world in terms of connectivity and speed – but penetration is way behind the rest of the world.” The benefits of fibre as an access technology leads back to the question of financing new networks. “Competition is fierce to satisfy the high and growing demand and access to capital is critical for success.” “It is expensive to connect homes to a network, even in densely populated areas.” Quality management Campher says that while Investec has identified fibre networks as a promising growth industry and has gone to extremes to get to know the industry, the bank is still particularly sensitive to the quality of management when it looks at such new investments. “We have worked with MetroFibre for a number of years. Their first loan with us was a R100 million facility.” “Our differentiator is that we get to understand the people behind the business. We then perform a detailed due diligence and we are willing to back the right company using specialised debt packages. Management is critically important, not only the financial models, spreadsheets, and numbers. We understand this business,” says Campher. The figures suggest that Investec has supplied ample gearing to enable growth in this very important industry. While users are quick to complain about the cost of connectivity – and the relative cost of internet connectivity compared to other countries – it is getting cheaper. “And it is expected that consumption will increase further, because the benefits of better connectivity are huge for individuals and society alike,” he says. In essence, one gets the idea that Investec is, once again, looking for winners and willing to back the leading players in a growing industry. Is a listing of an interesting business coming? Brought to you by Investec.