Asian stocks rose Friday, tracking US peers as vaccine distribution boosted economic optimism despite an increase in Covid-19 cases. Oil climbed amid a prolonged effort to unblock the Suez Canal. A regional share gauge added more than 1%, led by Chinese and Japanese stocks. US and European equity futures pointed higher after the S&P 500 advanced and small-caps rallied, buoyed by President Joe Biden’s doubling of a vaccination target. US banks extended gains in after-hours trading as the Federal Reserve signaled an end to pandemic-era dividend curbs. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Ten-year US Treasury yields rose slightly after another lackluster auction of seven-year notes. The reaction was muted compared with the upheaval in bonds and interest-rate sensitive stocks following poor demand at last month’s sale. The dollar dipped but remained on course for its best week in three. Crude prices veered back up toward $60 a barrel. Efforts to dislodge the massive Ever Given container vessel blocking the Suez Canal will take until at least next Wednesday, raising the prospect of wider disruptions to trade.  Global equities remain just under record highs as investors consider progress in the fight against Covid-19 and the risks of inflation from heavy stimulus. The US recovery looks on track with latest data showing a bigger-than-forecast drop in weekly jobless claims. Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell​ reiterated the U.S. central bank would wait until the economy has “all but fully recovered” to pull back extraordinary monetary support. “The fears over higher inflation and higher interest rates are largely premature,” Sarah Lien, client portfolio manager at Eastspring Investments, told Bloomberg TV. “The market’s got ahead of itself — there’s still a negative output gap in the economy and we don’t think things are likely to overheat anytime soon.” In his first news conference since taking office, Biden highlighted the rivalry with China and declined to comment on whether import tariffs would remain in place. He said he’s open to diplomacy with North Korea but warned recent missile tests violated international rules and could prompt a response. Elsewhere, Bitcoin slumped to trade below $53 000. A collapse in the Bitcoin futures contract rollover suggests the token may face more near-term downward pressure. On the virus front, Mexico became the third country with more than 200 000 confirmed deaths due to Covid-19. These are some of the main moves in financial markets: