The global economy is poised for a solid rebound this year as vaccines and expansionary policies help repair damage from a pandemic that destroyed more than a quarter of a billion jobs, according to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Gross domestic product worldwide will rise 4.7% in 2021, the Geneva-based organisation projected, snapping back from the sharpest annual drop in output since World War II. Last year’s contraction in global GDP of 3.9% eliminated an estimated 255 million full-time jobs, “with no region spared,” it said. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Central banks were credited for the swift responses that buffered the financial shock at the beginning of the crisis, moves that Unctad said helped ease liquidity constraints and calm anxious investors. “Their willingness to keep the monetary spigot open saw financial markets bounce back quickly from the lows of March-April, with many ending the year at an all-time high,” according to the report published on Thursday. Nations that tackled the Covid-19 pandemic with rapid monetary, fiscal and vaccination programs will likely see the strongest economic growth this year, according to Unctad’s report. Healthy recoveries are expected in both developing and developed economies: Longer term, though, the UN agency cautioned about status-quo policies like those that exacerbate inequalities and foster financial instability. “It seems reasonable to assume that, unless there is a determined shift in policy direction, the world economy will take more than a decade to catch up with its pre-pandemic trend,” the report stated.