 NOMPU SIZIBA: Diversified industrial company Afrimat released the Afrimat Construction Index for the fourth quarter. It showed good progress in the third quarter, registering at 111.3 index points. That’s up 60% on where the gauge was in the second quarter during the hard lockdown period. The index’s compiler, Dr Roelof Botha, says that the index is virtually at the same level it was at the beginning of 2018. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Well, to take us through the index and the sectors covered more broadly, I’m joined on the line by independent economist Dr Roelof Botha. Thanks very much Dr Botha, for joining us. If you look at about eight sub-indices in the index, which areas were the positive drivers of an improved overall number? Dr ROELOF BOTHA: This time around the further recovery of building plans passed, the value of building plans passed and of buildings completed, were the standout items. But if one compares the current sub-index values with our base period in the first quarter of 2011, the value of hardware sales is way above the others, except for the shining stars, and we expect that to continue because a lot of people are refurnishing their homes. They realise that they’re going to be not “working from home”, but “living in the office”, which is more appropriate. Home is a place where you’ve got kids and, in my case, grandchildren – and you’ve got dogs and cats and chickens and parrots and what have you. So I think there’s a lot of activity in that space because many people simply will continue to telecommute, probably spending at least between 50 and 80% of their time at their home office, and that will certainly continue to incentivise a lot of activity in this field. NOMPU SIZIBA: So where in the index did you see some weakness? Dr ROELOF BOTHA: We’re very concerned about the continued weak performance of value added in construction, and we have to place a question mark over this, because it contradicts some of the other indicators. Because I do a lot of travelling by road, especially in the North West Province, I see informal-sector building activity like it’s going out of fashion. And also in Limpopo there are literally dozens of fairly large hardware stores, which I can almost guarantee do not fill in the Stas SA survey. So there’s a lot of activity in residential construction in the informal sector. It’s not entirely informal – somewhere in between, I suppose. But it’s not as formal as the ones where you have a mortgage bond and where the data flows through to Stas SA. I think there’s an under-estimation of some indicators, certainly. NOMPU SIZIBA: It connects with what you’ve just mentioned. While we haven’t necessarily seen actual data, we have been hearing bits and pieces that there is more construction work in the pipeline coming through in connection with government’s infrastructure expansion plans. Are you hearing or seeing the same? And if so, where? Dr ROELOF BOTHA: Yes. What encourages us as well – and we’ve done some research at the Optimum Investment Group – is the potential impact on the economy. It is absolutely enormous, because construction is the most labour-intensive sector of the economy. We need infrastructure. I don’t think that’s debatable, and we’ve got the money because of this R100 billion windfall that National Treasury got because they  underestimated the growth potential. You see reports almost on a weekly basis that large companies today, one of the large banks, has stated that they didn’t expect the economy to recover so quickly, to the extent that there’s now a shortage of bricks and even some steel products, which is a good sign. It tells you that the demand is forthcoming, but the infrastructure drive is certainly slowly but surely going into action. I must tell you that this is an industry where people cannot be separated. If you’re working on site, on a specific part of that construction process, it’s very physical, it’s heavy breathing. And if you suspect somebody has Covid, you’re going to stay away from work. The absenteeism is a problem. NOMPU SIZIBA: Yes, it is. The 2020 GDP data showed a contraction in the overall economy of 7%, and the construction sector was a significant laggard for the year. But you do seem to be optimistic about the sector’s prospects. Dr ROELOF BOTHA: Oh, absolutely. But I unfortunately have to sound a warning note. Being an eternal optimist, I must control myself from time to time. The fact is that January was not a good month because of the lockdown. February is the shortest month of the year. People are still a little bit scared because of the impetus of the second wave. If we can escape a third wave – and chances are that we can – and the vaccinations can gain traction, then we are looking at a really stunning second quarter for construction. But we don’t expect the index to increase dramatically in the first quarter. NOMPU SIZIBA: You actually jumped the gun there because my final question to you was what headwinds you see in terms of our economic recovery? And would the vaccination process be one of them, especially given the fact that there are some 40 million people in total that need to be vaccinated, and of course we only have 170 000 people who have been vaccinated so far. Dr ROELOF BOTHA: Well, obviously if they continue vaccinating people who are exposed to large numbers of other people like health workers, like teachers and so on, law enforcement officers and such, you have an exponentially much larger positive effect on eventually gaining immunity for society as a whole. That is certainly one of the problems. At the other end is the dilemma at the municipalities. About a third of our country’s municipalities are dysfunctional. And even those that are regarded as more or less functional – I don’t know whether Pretoria/Tshwane is in that scope, because the service delivery here is just unbelievably defective. The potholes are just becoming bigger. The clearance certificates for a property transaction – you can almost forget it. You wait months and months, and then you have to start over because the time has elapsed. It is shocking, the level of incompetence, bureaucratic incompetence – and that is certainly hampering construction. So, if government has this grand idea in the cabinet to streamline economic growth with construction, that’s a good idea, but it needs to infuse the municipalities with better skill levels. I suppose they will do that at some stage, otherwise it’s going to be very slow. NOMPU SIZIBA: What about that concept of the construction mafia? Has that disappeared or is it still very much there? Dr ROELOF BOTHA: Well, there are probably still signs, but thanks to Covid to a large extent it’s not that visible any more. But it’s something that one needs to keep an eye on in future, certainly. NOMPU SIZIBA: That was Dr Roelof Botha, He’s the compiler of the Afrimat Construction Index.