The founder and former CEO of Cannon Asset Managers Adrian Saville (pictured) has left the company. This week he formally joined London-based multi-family office Genera Capital as an investment specialist in their Johannesburg operation. “Adrian will focus on the efficient implementation of our risk-balanced multi-asset and specialist portfolios,” Genera said in a note. “With over 25 years of experience, Adrian’s entrepreneurial flair and passion for financial markets make him an obvious fit for the families we represent.” Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Saville told Citywire that he was “presented with an opportunity that was simply too good to ignore”. “Genera Capital has a fantastic culture. I have known Raymond Goss [Genera Capital chief executive] through the industry for several years. In recent times, I have become familiar with Genera Capital’s investment philosophy and process,’ he said. “They have a team with great quality and depth. Their approach to investing, in particular, has a holistic investment focus, and the way they implement portfolios with a global and multi-asset focus just aligned with me. It is a very personal and strategic decision.” In a statement, Goss said: “I cannot overstate the importance of experience in financial markets, particularly for us as we partner with a sophisticated investor with a global footprint. Having Adrian’s voice at the table adds to the depth of expertise we have regarding public and private capital markets. He has been a positive voice for development in South Africa, which is evident in his media activity, research, and public policy engagement.” In a note in March posted on LinkedIn, Saville indicated that his “extraordinary 22-year journey” at Cannon was ending. He wrote in that note about the “privilege of working with incredible investors and wonderful people”. Saville sold his shareholding in Cannon to Bidvest Financial Services in January 2018. Genera Capital has domestic portfolios but does not have South African funds, he said. General Capital, established in 2016, focuses on looking after the wealth of several family investors based in South Africa and elsewhere in the world. Saville is also a Professor of Economics and Finance at the Gordon Institute of Business Science (Gibs) and has held this position since November 2003. He said that he would continue with this role while working for Genera. “There is no change in my Gibs responsibilities and roles,” he said. Patrick Cairns is South Africa Editor at Citywire, which provides insight and information for professional investors globally. This article was first published on Citywire South Africa here, and republished with permission.