Global stocks traded around all-time highs Wednesday as investors weighed the economic rebound from the pandemic and stimulus support. The dollar halted a four-day loss. A gauge of Asia-Pacific equities fluctuated, as did US and European futures. Chinese stocks underperformed while Japan advanced. Toshiba Corp. shares are poised to surge after the company received an initial buyout offer from CVC Capital Partners. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100 retreated overnight as volume on US exchanges slipped below 10 billion shares for the first time this year. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Indian shares rallied after the central bank retained its accommodative stance, seeking to support an economy facing a resurgence of coronavirus infections. Oil held above $59 a barrel amid optimism that economic expansion will pick up. The International Monetary Fund upgraded its global growth forecast while warning about a divergence between advanced and less-developed economies.  A global stock gauge is around unprecedented levels on expectations for continued central bank support and the strongest world expansion in at least four decades. Concerns about higher borrowing costs destabilizing the market have eased, with bond yields subsiding as traders pull their more-aggressive positioning for Federal Reserve policy tightening. Investors are awaiting the latest Fed minutes for clues about the outlook. “Central banks are continuing to keep interest rates so low, so people are looking for some place to put their money where they can get a return,” Sarah Hunt, Alpine Woods Capital Investors associate portfolio manager, said on Bloomberg TV. “That’s also why you have stocks priced somewhat for perfection.” US labour-market data showed job openings rose to a two-year high in February, led by gains in some of the industries hardest hit during the pandemic, adding to signs of a strengthening American rebound. Some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: