Crypto arbitrage has become popular in SA as more people are introduced to the concept of profiting from price differences in cryptos between different exchanges. “We’ve seen a big demand for our arbitrage service over the last six months from people who want to enter the crypto space in a relatively safe way,” says Jon Ovadia, CEO of Ovex, SA’s largest crypto prime broker worth almost R2 billion. “We’ve structured the arbitrage service to take as much risk out of it as possible. To date we have generated arbitrage profits of more than R30 million for our clients, and we currently trade more than R4 billion a month through our exchange service.” Find out more about the Ovex arbitrage service here. The difference in bitcoin prices between overseas and local exchanges varies widely. Last week, bitcoin could be bought on overseas exchanges like Kraken for 6.5% less than on local exchanges. Over the previous two weeks, that arbitrage percentage went to zero and even negative, mostly due to the Mirror Trading International (MTI) liquidators selling R1.1 billion of bitcoin on a local exchange. For a brief period, it was cheaper to buy bitcoin in SA than it was overseas – and many people did. But the more usual pattern is for bitcoin in SA to sell at a premium of 3.2-5% when compared to overseas exchanges – this is called the arbitrage gap. To access this arbitrage opportunity, you have to use your Single Discretionary Allowance (SDA) of R1 million, which is available to all South Africans. There is another R10 million available in the form of a Foreign Investment Allowance (FIA), provided you have a tax clearance certificate from the South African Revenue Service (Sars) and that you can prove that the funds are your own. For a married couple, both of whom are tax compliant, that means R22 million a year is available for arbitrage investing. Ovadia says the average net profit from the company’s arbitrage service is 2.2%. On the R22 million available to a tax-complaint married couple, that’s R484 000 potential profit a year. What’s more is that Ovex offers free tax practitioner services through its network of licensed tax consultants to assist its clients in accessing that R10 million of foreign capital allowance. Is there risk? A question a lot of Moneyweb readers are asking is whether it this is free of risk. The answer is no, it is not risk free. Like any investment, there are risks, though arbitrage trading is less risky than most forms of crypto trading, or most investments for that matter. There’s the risk that the exchange fails (and you could lose your funds, or at least have them frozen), so it’s important to look at the exchange’s balance sheet and financial backers. In Ovex’s case, it recently closed a $4 million investment at a nearly R2 billion valuation from FTX, one of the biggest international crypto exchanges by trading volume. Another risk is market related. For example, let’s say at 09h00 the arbitrage gap between Kraken and Ovex is 5% and you decide to execute an arbitrage trade. You have to purchase US dollars and ship them to your account on the Kraken exchange. Once there, you purchase bitcoin and immediately ship it to your Ovex account (you must have accounts on both exchanges to do this) under the expectation of selling it for a 5% profit. It can take an hour or two before the bitcoin arrives in your Ovex account, by which time the bitcoin price on the Ovex exchange may have dropped, wiping out your arbitrage profit. Ovex removes this market risk in two ways: 1. By extending lines of credit to its customers that effectively locks in a profit, regardless of how much time it takes to fully execute the arbitrage trade. Once you give instructions to Ovex to execute the arbitrage trade, your profit is secure, even if crypto prices move wildly (as they are often prone to do) between the time it takes to purchase the crypto offshore and ship it to SA. 2. Rather than using bitcoin as the arbitrage asset, Ovex uses a stablecoin called True USD (TUSD) which is a crypto fully backed 1:1 by the US dollar. Like bitcoin, these stablecoins trade at a 2-5% premium in SA compared to overseas. The advantage of using TUSD rather than bitcoin is that
TUSD is widely considered to be one of the most trusted stablecoins on the market, and is verifiably pegged to the US dollar (avoiding many of the controversies around competing stablecoins like Tether USD). Because most stablecoins are backed by fiat currencies such as the rand and the US dollar, they are not subject to the price volatility of crypto assets and are often used by crypto investors to “park” profits made from crypto investing. They also exist outside the banking system and therefore can be transferred and cleared much faster than through a bank. Have questions? Find out more about the Ovex arbitrate service. How much do I need to start? Another question Moneyweb readers are asking is: how much do I need to start? Ovadia replies that between R100 000 and R250 000 is ideal, as there are some costs that are fixed, and can reduce the profit percentage substantially on smaller amounts. For example, the cost of purchasing forex is a flat R500, which is 1% on an amount of R50 000, but only 0.5% on R100 000. This puts an extra 0.5% profit in the pocket of the person trading with R100 000 rather than R50 000. If you are able to trade with R200 000, the forex cost is a much smaller 0.25% – putting an extra bit of profit in your pocket. However you can get started with as little at R50 000, and then expect around 3% per week in profits.

Is it a scam? Some readers ask whether arbitrage is a scam. The answer is no. This should not be compared to the likes of MTI which was promising returns of up to 10% a month, which it claimed was due to an exceptionally talented computerised algorithm that lost only one day of trading out of 200 (the Finance Sector Conduct Authority found no evidence of the existence of this algorithm). Anyone guaranteeing returns should be avoided. This is not the case with arbitrage. While it is conceivable that you could make 4-5% in a week, this is entirely dependent on market conditions. There are no guarantees. As we saw in the last few weeks, the arbitrage market completely disappeared. At other times, the arbitrage gap between local and overseas markets is too thin to trade. Last week the gap reemerged with a vengeance and at the time of publication was around 4.5-6%. What are the fees?

Ovex charges 1% of the capital amount, which is in keeping with international charging rates. “Crypto arbitrage is a great way for South Africans to get exposure to the crypto market in a relatively safe way. We have done as much as we can to remove as many of the risks as we can and the fact that we have paid out over R28 million in arbitrage profits to customers is testament to that,” says Ovadia. You can find out more or sign up here. Brought to you by Ovex. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.