Longer-dated Treasury yields extended their advance and US stock-index futures mostly fell as investors awaited clues on the timing of stimulus tapering by the Federal Reserve. The dollar strengthened as Americans braced for Joe Biden’s tax plans. The 10-year rate traded at a two-week high, extending a bounce-back from its 50-day moving average. June contracts on the Nasdaq 100 Index led losses in the derivative market. The dollar headed for its first back-to-back gain this month. European stocks were little changed amid another busy earnings-reporting day. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Global markets are searching for new catalysts with stocks trading near record highs and even strong earnings beats are met with a shrug. Traders may need further assurance that policy makers will overlook stronger economic data to keep rates ultra-low and bond purchases at pace. Amid looming tax increases they can ill-afford any hint of tapering. “A lot of dovishness from the Fed was already priced in, which has weighed on US yields and the dollar since the start of April despite the strong US data,” strategists led by Jean-Francois Paren, global head of research at Credit Agricole SA, wrote in a note. “Even if the Fed is very likely to leave its monetary stance totally unchanged today, there is still a high bar for the Fed to surprise markets on the dovish side. This, in turn, may continue to support a rebound in the dollar and US yields.”  A string of encouraging data and rapid vaccination progress have boosted optimism the developed world is on the path to emerge from the pandemic effects. That, in turn, has revived the so-called reflation trade in recent days. A release Thursday may show the US gross domestic product increased an annualised 6.9% in the first quarter. All these recovery signals are stoking speculation over when the Fed will start slowing its stimulus. A surge in commodities including copper and wheat paused on Wednesday, but has already fanned concerns about price pressures. Goldman Sachs Group Inc. predicts further rallies over the next six months as the global economy rebounds from the pandemic. The Australian dollar fell after weaker-than-expected inflation data reinforced the view that monetary policy normalisation will lag behind the Fed. Here are some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: