Diversification is a bedrock principle of sound investing, and things are no different when it comes to cryptos. Many crypto investors only hold a single crypto asset, like bitcoin, but this approach is somewhat flawed if your goal is to generate a return. An investment into a single asset provides you with 100% of the gains or losses associated with that asset, but not all crypto-asset gains are equal. Over a year, there can be differences of 2 000% in gains between the top crypto assets, and that means that investing in a single asset gives you considerably less exposure to the sometimes unpredictably good performance of another asset. There was once a good case in holding only bitcoin, but over the past four years the total value of bitcoin versus the total value of all crypto assets has declined from 85% to around 50% at the time of writing. This means that other crypto assets, through significant gains in value, have outperformed bitcoin. Source: Revix One approach to get exposure to potential winners is to equally weigh your investments across a ‘bundle’ of crypto assets. This gives you an equal opportunity to get increased returns over multiple assets as opposed to just one and gives you a greater chance of catching multiple winners each month if your diversified portfolio is adjusted each month to track the top assets at that time. A 2018 study called The Case for Diversification within Crypto Investing outlined the case for diversification. Here are some of the key findings: As proof of the need to diversify, consider that while bitcoin is up 430% over 12 months, Revix’s Top 10 Bundle (equally weighted over the top 10 cryptos as measured by market cap) is up 790% over the same period. You were far better off invested in the Top 10 Bundle than a straightforward holding of bitcoin. The Revix Smart Contract Bundle (invested equally over the five largest smart contract-focused cryptocurrencies) is up 660% over 12 months, against 447% for the Revix Payments Bundle (invested in the five largest payments-focused cryptos). Source: Revix Sean Sanders, CEO of crypto investment company Revix, explains: “The value of diversification is a well-established fundamental of investing, and any way you slice and dice the numbers, a diversified crypto portfolio will give you better risk-adjusted returns and often better absolute returns over time. That has been particularly evident over the last year. “Diversification works in every asset class in the world. It should come as no surprise that it works in crypto as well,” adds Sanders. How to diversify using Revix ‘bundles’ The Top 10 Bundle is like the JSE Top 40 or S&P 500 for crypto and provides equally weighted exposure to the top 10 cryptocurrencies making up more than 85% of the crypto market. This bundle includes all the cryptocurrencies mentioned in this article and has significantly outperformed Bitcoin over the last 12 months. The Payment Bundle provides equally weighted exposure to the top 5 payment focused cryptocurrencies looking to make payments cheaper, faster and more global. These cryptos include the likes of Bitcoin, Ripple, Bitcoin Cash, Stellar and Litecoin. The Smart Contract Bundle provides equally weighted exposure to the top 5 smart contract focused cryptocurrencies like Ethereum, EOS or Tron that enable developers to build applications on top of their blockchains, similar to how Apple builds apps on top of its OS operating system. Revix’s bundles have outperformed an investment in Bitcoin alone over a one-, three- and five-year time period. All of Revix’s bundles are rebalanced monthly; this means the best performers move into the bundle, and poor performing assets are dropped to catch as much upside as possible each month. What else does Revix offer? In addition to Revix’s crypto bundles, it offers: What fees does Revix charge? Revix doesn’t charge monthly subscription fees but rather a simple 1.00% transaction fee for both buys and sells and a 0.17% per month rebalancing fee (which amounts to 2.04% a year only) on the total Bundle value held. So whether you want to invest in a slice of the entire crypto market or a specific niche sector in the crypto space, Revix has a low-cost and easy to use investment option to suit your needs. Brought to you by Revix. For more information, visit Revix. This article is intended for informational purposes only. The views expressed are not and should not be construed as investment advice or recommendations. This article is not an offer, nor the solicitation of an offer, to buy or sell any of the assets or securities mentioned herein. You should not invest more than you can afford to lose, and before investing please take into consideration your level of experience and investment objectives, and seek independent financial advice if necessary. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.