For those looking to support people affected by the fire that has destroyed several buildings on the University of Cape Town’s (UCT’s) Upper Campus and led to the evacuation of its residents, they can make donations to several accounts:  Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. To donate financial aid: UCT Donations Account Account name: UCT Donations Account
Bank: Standard Bank
Branch code: Rondebosch Branch, 025009
Account number: 07 152 2387
Swift code: SBZAZAJJ And http://www.alumni.uct.ac.za/giving/ways-to-give  Gift of the Givers Account name: Gift of the Givers Foundation Bank: Standard Bank Branch code: Pietermaritzburg, 057525. Account number: 052137228 Swift code: SBZAZAJJ Ref: UCT Fire Toll Free Number: 0800 786 911  Volunteer Wildfire Services (VWS) To donate: go to https://www.givengain.com/d/c/2486#amount or SMS VWS and your name to 41006 to donate R25. Looking for more information before donating? Contact VWS Vicechair and Fundraising coordinator on director@vws.org.za.  Food and other products: Food deliveries for firefighters Drop off points: Roland Street Fire Station, Sea Point Fire Station, Salt River Fire Station, and Fish Hoek Fire Station. Products needed: Energy drinks (non-fizzy), wet whips, energy bars, individually packed sandwiches and eye drops. Anyone wishing to donate foodstuff is advised that items must be sealed, in accordance with Covid-19 protocols.  For UCT students Drop off points: Graduate School of Business (GSB) at the V&A Waterfront or at Old Mutual Pinelands, West Campus. Products needed: Food, drinks, and personal items such as toothbrushes (No clothing is required).