Crypto arbitrage traders may be wondering why the risk-free arbitrage profit they are usually able to earn disappeared altogether two weeks ago, and then magically reappeared last week. Two weeks ago, the arbitrage premium on bitcoin on local South African exchanges dropped to zero – and even went negative for a period – meaning it was cheaper to buy bitcoin in SA than it was overseas. This is a rare occurrence, in this case triggered by the sale by MTI liquidators of R1.1 billion of bitcoin belonging to investors. All these bitcoin were sold on South African exchanges, which created a temporary glut of supply, pushing down the local prices and eliminating the arbitrage gap. This could have been avoided had the liquidators made use of a Prime Broker such as Ovex, which would have been able to buy the R1.1 billion of Bitcoin instantly at a much higher price than that achieved on an exchange. Because crypto prices tend to take their lead from bitcoin, this meant the arbitrage premium usually observed in SA also narrowed or disappeared. The MTI liquidators appear to have completed their sale of bitcoin about 10 days ago, at which point the more normal arbitrage gap started to reappear. On Tuesday this week, for example, the profit an arbitrage trader could earn widened to between 4.8% and 6.5%, and has been consistently around these levels for about a week. “What we have seen is that crypto arbitrage gaps appear in those countries that have foreign exchange controls, such as SA. This of course impacts the demand for hard currency assets, such as bitcoin,” says Jon Ovadia, CEO of crypto company Ovex, which offers South Africans a relatively simple and automated way to profit from crypto arbitrage. It is worth looking at the three main factors that influence the arbitrage gap. “It’s important to understand that arbitrage premiums narrow and widen for a number of reasons, but these are the principal ones,” says Ovadia. “People who have been doing arbitrage trading for several years have seen the average premiums drop, but as we have seen this week, the gap suddenly reappears. I think the arbitrage market will be around for a long time to come.” Rather than buying bitcoin on an overseas exchange and sending it to SA, Ovex executes trades using a stablecoin called True USD (TUSD), which is backed 1:1 to the US dollar. Effectively, you are buying crypto abroad, shipping them to SA and selling them locally for a 2-4% profit. Ovex takes care of the logistics of the arbitrage trade while eliminating as many of the risks as possible. The chief risk is that the crypto price drops while the trade is in progress. Ovex mitigates this by extending credit to clients from the moment the arbitrage trade is executed, so that profits are locked in as soon as the trade is authorised. Ovex has generated more than R40 million in profits for clients from its automated arbitrage service (you can also do a manual arbitrage service through Ovex, which requires you to authorise each trade). Clients can use their R1 million discretionary allowance plus a further R10 million foreign investment allowance (for which you need tax clearance). The average net profit on this R11 million is 2.2%, says Ovadia, equivalent to R242 000 per year. For a married couple, the potential profit could be double this. You can sign up with Ovex or find out more here. Brought to you by Ovex. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.