French President Emmanuel Macron announced a nationwide four-week lockdown, closing schools and business, in the latest and alarming sign that Europe is yet again losing control of the pandemic. “We did everything we could to make these decisions as late as possible, when they became strictly necessary. That is now,” Macron said in a televised address on Wednesday. New variants make the virus “more contagious and deadlier,” he said. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The French leader implored the nation to make an extra effort as the lockdown comes into force on Saturday. Restrictions will be flexible this weekend, during the Easter holidays, to allow people to relocate on inter-regional travels. It represents a policy reversal for Macron. He had favored a localized approach, which the UK had also tried with little success, and his rejection of advice for stricter measures sooner comes with political risks a year out from presidential elections. Macron acknowledged mistakes in handling the pandemic, but said the nation was learning from them. Last week, he had made a point of saying he’d give “no mea culpa.” Either way, a lockdown comes at an economic cost, with 150 000 stores shut. The finance ministry said the cost of measures, including furlough and tax relief, would rise to 11 billion euros ($13 billion) a month from 7.2 billion euros. Earlier in the evening, Italy joined Germany in extending their partial shutdowns well into April, with Prime Minister Mario Draghi’s government saying current restrictions on movement and business openings in high-risk areas will remain in place until the end of April 30. Extra measures include making vaccination mandatory for medical staff. The resurgence in the region’s outbreak is a setback for governments, whose plans to get life back to normal and revive their economies have already been stymied by a sluggish vaccine rollout across the EU. The EU has administered just 15 doses per 100 people, less than a third of what the UK has managed, according to Bloomberg’s Coronavirus Vaccine Tracker. The US has given 45 shots per 100 people. The bloc’s vaccine campaign has been plagued by delays in deliveries from AstraZeneca Plc and concerns over the safety of its vaccine. Many EU states have also been slow in administering the doses they have received. In his adddress, that lasted some 30 minutes, Macron spoke extensively about education. Schools, including nurseries, will shut for three weeks from April 12 to April 26, he said. It was something Macron had wanted to avoid as he had taken great pride in keeping class-rooms going. “We are one of the few countries that kept schools open because we believe in this investment in young people, our young people need to learn and no one knows the long-term social and economic consequences the lockdowns will have on them,” Macron said. Parents who aren’t able to work from home will be entitled to unemployment benefits, and all measures to provide state support to sectors forced to shut will be extended. Macron also said the French should make more effort to work from home. According to a survey cited by the labor ministry, out of 8.4 million people who could easily work from home, only 5.6 million do so. Laying out a time-line for reopening the country, Macron said terraces of bars, restaurants and cafes as well as some cultural venues could re-open from mid-May for France to rediscover its “art of living.”That is also when he said people over 50 will be able to get vaccinated. Rules forcing most non-essential businesses to close, already implemented in Covid hotspots, including Paris, will be extended nationwide. Earlier this month, Macron had already moved to lock down an area representing more than a third of people in France, while encouraging some open-air activities. More than 8.5 million French people have received at least a jab. That’s around 12% of the population. The campaign, which has focused on older and more vulnerable people, is paying off, with fewer deaths among those above 80, Macron insisted. France is one of the most vaccine-skeptical countries in the world and trust in the Astra shot has been diminished. But for Macron, the way out the crisis is now clear. “We are doing everything to vaccinate, vaccinate, vaccinate,” he said. “Without rest, without day off. Saturday and Sunday like during the week.”