Asian stocks and US equity futures rose Thursday as the global recovery and President Joe Biden’s infrastructure plan helped traders look past lockdowns from resurgent Covid-19 cases. Treasuries trimmed losses. A gauge of Asia-Pacific shares was set for its first climb in three days, with Hong Kong leading gains, after data signaled a pick-up in regional manufacturing. S&P 500, Nasdaq 100 and European futures edged higher. The tech-heavy US index rallied overnight, outperforming the S&P 500. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Ten-year Treasury yields dipped after the worst quarterly performance since 1980 for the Bloomberg Barclays index tracking US government bonds. Oil gained ahead of a high-stakes OPEC+ meeting on supply curbs. A US dollar gauge ticked higher. Australia’s currency fell to the lowest point this year. Chipmakers were in focus after Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. said it plans to spend a staggering $100 billion over three years to expand capacity.  The US administration’s $2.25 trillion infrastructure plan outlined Wednesday appeared to boost sentiment less than some expected. The goal of funding it with higher corporate taxes and the prospect of resistance to the overall initiative in Congress tempered the response. In east Asia, data showed the world’s manufacturing heartland is booming as the recovery from the pandemic spurs global trade. “There is still some room for recovery in stocks that will benefit from the economic recovery and the reopening trade,” Ania Aldrich, investment principal at Cambiar Investors LLC, said on Bloomberg TV. “There’s still a lot of growth that has to come and that’s not necessarily reflected in earnings yet.” Investors remain focused on inflation risk as central banks reassert their commitment to low interest rates. Traders for now are looking past worsening virus trends, such as lockdowns in France and Canada’s Ontario province. Some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in financial markets: