Asian stocks tumbled and US futures declined Wednesday as rising virus cases around the world led to renewed concern about their economic impact. Treasuries held overnight gains. An MSCI Inc. gauge of Asia-Pacific shares was on track for its biggest drop in four weeks with Japan and Hong Kong leading. Nasdaq 100 futures underperformed. S&P 500 contracts fell after the benchmark dropped for a second day, extending its slide from an all-time high, with investors showing caution ahead of the brunt of the earnings season. Treasuries held a rally that sent the 10-year yield to its lowest level in more than five weeks. The dollar edged higher. Oil prices retreated. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership.  After rising to record highs, stocks find themselves under pressure from a renewed surge in Covid-19 case around the world, raising the prospect of new lockdowns and hampering the economic recovery. Tokyo and Osaka will ask the Japanese government to declare a state of emergency. Glitches with vaccine rollouts are also raising concerns about the pace of reopenings. “The data is very mixed: on the positive side we have great vaccine rollouts that are happening and then the negative is that we have J&J being halted,” Julie Biel, portfolio manager at Kayne Anderson Rudnick, said on Bloomberg TV. “Is that going to create more vaccine hesitancy? How much of that is going to impact longer term the ability to reopen?” The end of the pandemic “is going to be much more of a push-pull, it’s going to happen in increments,” she said. The World Health Organisation said coronavirus cases are rising in all regions except Europe, with India driving a surge in Asia. Elsewhere, gold cemented an advance amid the risk-off move. Bitcoin fell for the fifth time in six days. Here are some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: