Asian stocks retreated Friday as China’s antitrust crackdown weighed on technology firms, while US equity futures fell after another record on Wall Street overnight. Hong Kong led regional losses and an Asia-Pacific stock gauge headed for its first drop in three days. Chinese regulators imposed wide-ranging restrictions on the financial divisions of 13 companies, including Tencent Holdings and ByteDance, in a broadening effort to rein in the giants of the tech industry. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. China’s purchasing managers surveys also cooled risk appetite, pointing to slower expansion in activity. The US earlier reported 6.4% annualised growth in the first quarter. Futures edged higher in Europe but fell the US, after another record high for the S&P 500 Index. Mixed earnings reports Thursday included disappointments for Ford Motor Co. and Twitter Inc., and gains for Facebook Inc. and Amazon.com Inc. Concerns about chip shortages erased an earnings-driven climb for Apple Inc. Treasuries and the dollar were steady, while the German bund yield is hovering around the highest level in more than year.  Equity markets may be ready for a pause after a month of gains. Investors are eyeing more support for the US recovery after President Joe Biden unveiled a $1.8 trillion social package in addition to his infrastructure plans. And there’s no sign yet of the Federal Reserve withdrawing policy accommodation, with Chair Jerome Powell reasserting this week that he’s looking for more progress in the jobs market, and that inflation pressures are likely temporary. “The trouble is the asset froth that results from this — we see asset valuations very, very stretched,” said Yves Bonzon, chief investment officer at Julius Baer Group Ltd. “You can ask yourself, will Chairman Powell blink and start to guide for slightly less accommodative policy sooner than expected? That could be a risk as early as the third quarter.” Meanwhile, copper topped $10 000 a metric ton for the first time since 2011, nearing that year’s record high as the global recovery stokes demand and mines struggle to keep up. Crude oil dipped, trading just below $65 a barrel. These are some of the main moves in markets: