Stocks rose with US futures on Thursday as investors awaited key economic data and assessed earnings reports. Treasury yields fell. European equities climbed as electrical power firm ABB Ltd. boosted its revenue guidance and a rally in base metals lifted miners. Most Asian shares advanced, though gauges for Hong Kong and China fell as the Chinese central bank’s liquidity operations signaled it’s seeking to contain rising leverage. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. US futures pointed to a rebound after indexes eased from all-time peaks on Wednesday, when a drop in cryptocurrency exchange Coinbase Global Inc. overshadowed strong bank earnings. Results are due later on Thursday from firms including Citigroup Inc., BlackRock Inc. and Bank of America Corp. The ruble slid with the Biden administration poised to take action against Russian individuals and entities in retaliation for alleged misconduct related to the SolarWinds hack and the US election.  Expectations of a strong economic recovery, combined with optimism over monetary and fiscal stimulus, have pushed equities near record levels as company reporting continues. Data due Thursday on US jobless claims and retail sales will be keenly watched, as will any developments on the vaccine rollout. “With the upswing in the economy and inflationary pressures, cyclical sectors are going to do particularly well, especially the new cyclicals — stocks related to infrastructure, electrical grid modernisation, clean energy and storage,” said Eli Lee, head of investment strategy at Bank of Singapore. “But bear in mind when you get returns that high, volatility is par for the course.” Elsewhere, Bitcoin fell back from an overnight record. Oil steadied after Wednesday’s surge on signs the demand outlook was improving. In Asia, traders are also watching for further tremors from the sharp selloff in the bonds of distressed-debt enterprise China Huarong Asset Management Co., which has pushed investment-grade spreads higher. Some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in financial markets: