South Africa is not considering terminating its contract with Johnson & Johnson (J&J) for 31 million doses of its Covid-19 vaccine, Health Minister Zweli Mkhize said on Wednesday, a day after it suspended its rollout. The suspension followed US federal health agencies recommending pausing use of the J&J shot because of rare cases of blood clots. The pause in the United States is expected to be a matter of days. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. ‘Downpayments to J&J, Pfizer not refundable’
The South African government’s downpayments to Johnson & Johnson (J&J) and Pfizer for Covid-19 vaccines are not refundable under any circumstances, its health minister said on Wednesday, describing the condition as onerous. Zweli Mkhize made the comments a day after the government suspended the rollout of J&J’s vaccine, citing a recommendation by US federal health agencies to pause its use because of rare cases of blood clots. The suspension is the latest setback for South Africa’s efforts to immunise its population. It ditched plans to kick-start vaccinations with AstraZeneca’s vaccine in February because a small trial showed the shot offered minimal protection against mild to moderate illness from the dominant local coronavirus variant. Mkhize told a virtual meeting with a parliamentary committee that Africa’s most industrialised economy had to navigate “difficult and sometimes unreasonable” demands from vaccine manufacturers during negotiations. “As government we have found ourselves in a precarious position of having to choose between saving our citizens’ lives and risking putting the country’s assets into private companies’ hands,” he said. South Africa is paying $10 per dose for the J&J and Pfizer vaccines, he added.