Asian stocks were steady Thursday and US equity futures gained after the S&P 500 notched up another record on further evidence of the Federal Reserve’s commitment to supportive policy. Japanese shares slipped amid concerns Tokyo is planning stricter steps to curb rising virus infections, while Australia and Hong Kong outperformed. US and European equity futures climbed following modest gains in the S&P 500 Index amid dwindling volume on US exchanges. Tech giants including Apple Inc. helped push up the Nasdaq 100. The dollar headed for its fifth decline in six sessions, while Treasuries stabilised. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The British pound snapped two days of losses after coming under pressure because of concerns relating to AstraZeneca Plc’s vaccine, on which the UK is heavily dependent. Growing worries that the shot causes rare blood clots could hinder immunisation campaigns elsewhere in the world too.  Fed officials were united on the need to see more progress on the recovery before scaling back their massive bond-buying program, according to minutes from last month’s meeting released Wednesday. Policy makers have downplayed inflation risks, maintaining that the recent surge in Treasury yields reflects stronger growth prospects. Traders have scaled back their most-aggressive positioning for interest rates to start rising by the end of next year. Turbulence should return to the market in the second quarter, said Banny Lam, CEB International Investment Corp. head of research, on Bloomberg TV. Alongside the focus on inflation pressures, “we should put more focus on the theme of renewed economic growth.” Meanwhile, Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen unveiled details of a plan to bring back about $2 trillion in corporate profits into the US tax net. That would help fund the government’s spending initiatives, potentially reducing reliance on more borrowing that could drive rates higher. Some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: