Asian stocks fluctuated Wednesday after their biggest slide in two months as investors mulled a slew of earnings reports and awaited the conclusion of a Federal Reserve policy meeting. The dollar edged up. Equities climbed in Japan and fell in Australia, which reopened after a holiday. Nasdaq 100 futures jumped after Microsoft Corp.’s fiscal second-quarter sales rose at a faster clip than analysts had projected. S&P 500 and European contracts dipped. The US benchmark ended an up-and-down session slightly lower on Tuesday. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Elsewhere, Treasury yields were steady, oil advanced and Bitcoin dipped below the $32 000 level.  Global stocks are mostly treading water near record highs as US corporate earnings roll in. New coronavirus variants that sparked fresh lockdowns and other restrictions are weighing on the so-called reflation trade that bets on an end to curbs. Investors are also seeking more clarity on the timeline for President Joe Biden’s $1.9 trillion Covid-19 relief plan, and awaiting the Federal Reserve monetary policy decision later Wednesday. “For the reopening trade to really have persistence it is going to need to show a much broader participation across the market,” Jim McDonald, chief investment strategist at Northern Trust, said on Bloomberg TV. “The virus vaccine rollout is the most important development to help give confidence in the shape of the recovery.” Data showed global coronavirus cases surpassed 100 million. The UK became the first nation in Europe with 100 000 deaths. The Biden administration intends to order 100 million more doses each of Pfizer Inc. and Moderna Inc.’s coronavirus vaccines and at least temporarily speed up shipments to states. These are some key events coming up in the week ahead: These are the main moves in markets: