South Africa’s main stock index edged higher by less than 0.1% as of 9:44 a.m. in Johannesburg, holding out against the risk-off mood that weakened Asian markets in Friday trading as investors responded to increased restrictions and escalating coronavirus infections. The FTSE/JSE Africa All Share Index closed at a record high on Thursday and is up 1% since Monday. It’s set to gain for a fourth week, the longest winning streak in eight months. An MSCI index of emerging-market stocks was 0.8% lower on Friday, trimming its advance this week to 2.7%. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Mr Price jumped as much as 7.7% in a positive reaction to the retailer’s trading update. An index of South African general retailers edged 0.5% higher. Global tech investor and benchmark behemoth Naspers provided the most support to the overall market, climbing 2% to a record high as partly owned Chinese online giant Tencent Holdings climbed for a third day in Hong Kong in pursuit of a fresh-all time closing high. Prosus NV, which holds Naspers’ 31% stake in Tencent, gained 1.8%. Global luxury retailer Richemont also boosted the main index, gaining 1% at the end of a week in which it reported a surge in Chinese sales. Gold stocks rose for a third day for the first time this year, with AngloGold Ashanti adding 1.6% to lead the advance. Bank stocks weighed on the market as the rand led declines among emerging-market currencies amid the fading rally in risk assets, and a day after South Africa’s central bank left its key lending rate unchanged. Absa dropped 2.4%, Nedbank fell 2.4%, Standard Bank slipped 2.2%, with FirstRand down 1.8% Foreigners were net sellers of South African shares for a second day Thursday, with outflows of R565 million ($37.5 million), according to exchange operator JSE Ltd.