Stocks dipped Friday from all-time highs as restrictions to curb escalating coronavirus infections dented some of the optimism around earnings and the prospect of additional stimulus. The dollar edged higher. Equities in Hong Kong slid after a report that an area of the city would go into lockdown. Japanese stocks were modestly lower. S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100 futures slipped after US shares eked out a record high Thursday as tech stocks advanced. European contracts pointed lower. Treasuries were steady. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. President Joe Biden, who is pushing for nearly $2 trillion in additional fiscal spending, unveiled a national strategy to combat the coronavirus while warning the pandemic will worsen before it improves. In Hong Kong, local media reported officials will for the first time lock down tens of thousands of residents in a bid to contain a worsening outbreak.  “Hong Kong headlines have fuelled a bit of a risk-off tone in markets,” said Mingze Wu, currency trader at StoneX Group in Singapore. “Now that the party is over with Joe Biden’s inauguration, we’re back to looking at reality again, with the virus spread dominating headlines.” This week’s global equity rally, spurred by expectations of more economic support and the rollout of vaccines, is pausing as traders weigh still troubling Covid-19 trends. European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde warned the virus continues to pose a serious risk after policy makers voted to keep pumping unprecedented amounts of stimulus into the economy. Biden cautioned that another 100 000 lives could be lost over roughly the next month in the US. The nation’s infectious-disease chief Anthony Fauci said the seven-day average of new US infections suggests the virus “might actually be plateauing.” Germany’s coronavirus fatalities passed 50 000 while the UK suffered its worst day in the pandemic. Elsewhere, oil slid as commodities weakened amid Friday’s risk-off mood. Bitcoin fluctuated around $30 000 after earlier tumbling below that level, as the controversial boom in digital coins fizzles. These are the main moves in markets: