Tencent, the creator of the messaging platform WeChat, is in talks with banks for a $6 billion loan, according to people familiar with the matter. That would be the biggest dollar loan syndicated in Asia for a Chinese firm since 2019, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. It would also mark a flurry of potential debt financings by tech giants after people familiar said earlier this month that rival Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. was looking to sell up to $8 billion of bonds. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Under the terms being discussed, Tencent’s five-year deal would pay an interest margin of 80 basis points over Libor and offer all-in pricing of 85 basis points, the people said, asking not to be identified as they aren’t authorised to speak publicly. The proceeds are for general corporate purposes, they added. For more details click here. Tencent has in recent years spent billions of dollars buying stakes in promising startups, extending its reach in areas from social media to grocery delivery. It agreed last month to buy an additional 10% of Universal Music Group. Other people familiar with the matter also said Friday that Tencent has gotten a EU1.3 billion ($1.6 billion) loan for that deal. In addition, the company is locked in a fierce battle for users and advertisers against nemesis ByteDance Ltd., which runs TikTok. The WeChat operator is also pushing its gaming portfolios internationally, with hits like Call of Duty Mobile. A representative with Tencent declined to comment. South Africa’s Naspers is the single largest Tencent shareholder with a 31% stake worth over $145 billion (close to R2.2 trillion). © 2021 Bloomberg L.P.