Prescribed minimum benefits (PMB) are a list of minimum benefits that all medical schemes must provide to members, irrespective of what benefit option they belong to. By introducing a list of PMBs in 2000, the Council for Medical Schemes aimed to provide people with continuous care to improve their health and well-being. Healthcare is made more affordable when members have adequate cover and, in the event of a serious illness or major risk event, they do not run out of medical aid cover or lose benefits, forcing them to go to state hospitals for treatment. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. PMBs are made up as follows: PMBs can be complicated Not all medical schemes openly disclose what you are entitled to, making it important to speak to your Healthcare consultant for guidance so you are treated fairly. For instance, if you have one of the 25 listed chronic conditions, your medical scheme not only has to cover the medication for that condition, they must also cover doctor consultations and prescribed tests related to that condition. Your healthcare consultant can help you understand what treatment you are entitled to have covered when it comes to your condition. All medical schemes must cover PMBs in full as regulated by the Council of Medical Schemes. However, in order to contain the cost of providing this benefit, medical schemes may put measures in place to ensure you have the cover you need, without placing the scheme at financial risk: Medical schemes are allowed to impose important interventions and restrictions: Schemes have to include these arrangements in their rules and if you do not abide by these, you face having to pay all or part of the cost of the treatment yourself. It is important that you always check your benefits Speak to your healthcare advisor or consultant if your hospitalisation, treatment or chronic condition medication, or test falls within the scope of a PMB but has not been funded correctly or from the correct benefit, such as from your savings account instead of the risk benefit. Which 25 chronic conditions are covered?  Rachel Janssens is principal consultant at Alexander Forbes Health