Even as countries are beginning to roll out vaccines against Covid-19, travel in 2021 will be focused on regional destinations rather than international tourist meccas, according to a report released by Airbnb on Thursday. Major cities like Toronto, New York, and London were some of Airbnb’s biggest destinations in the second half of 2019. But the pandemic swooped in and shut down travel for months last year. As restrictions eased over the summer, smaller, low-profile destinations were in high demand, a trend Airbnb sees continuing this year. So far, the biggest increase in searches for booking include destinations like Rodanthe, on the outer banks of North Carolina, and Muskoka Lakes, a few hours’ drive from Toronto. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership.  Since April, travellers have most often opted for bookings 50-500 miles from their home. Of those surveyed, 55% reported being “very” or “extremely” interested in taking a trip within driving distance. Pre-pandemic, most Airbnb bookings were more than 500 miles from home. With shorter distances comes quicker decisions. Airbnb said travellers have become more spontaneous, booking closer to their travel dates. And flexibility with work and school schedules means trips will be more spread out over time, which would also help reduce crowds. “I don’t think you’re going to have this flood of everyone going on the same week to Las Vegas or Miami or LA,” Chesky said. Highlighting the pandemic’s unequal impact, Americans planning to travel in 2021 skew younger and wealthier. Three fourths of people making more than $100 000 a year plan to travel in 2021, while only 58% of those earning less than $50 000 say the same. A majority of Americans under 50 plan to travel in 2021, compared with 45% over that age. Luxury travel will likely outperform other sectors in 2021, due to increased savings rates among wealthy Americans, according to a report from AllianceBernstein dated Jan. 27. Business travel is unlikely to return to the way it was pre-pandemic, as technology has proven that it’s often expendable. It’s also Americans’ least-missed out-of-home activity anyway, according to the report. While Airbnb has pushed for more share of the business travel market in recent years, it’s not as dependent on it as other companies in the industry. Marriott International Inc. and Expedia Group, reported a 57% and 58% drop in sales in the third quarter of 2020, respectively, compared with an 18% drop for Airbnb. Last May, Airbnb cut 1 900 employees, or 25% of its workforce, in what Chesky says was one of the hardest decisions he’s ever had to make. Since then, the company has hired “a handful” of employees back, and is optimistic about being able to do more down the road, but for now is still “fairly cautious about the pace of bringing people back.” Now that Airbnb is a public company, after listing on the stock market in December, Chesky said he feels a greater sense of responsibility — for his shareholders, the hosts and also for content on the platform. That sentiment figured into the company’s decision to cancel reservations at Airbnb’ in the Washington area ahead of President Joe Biden’s inauguration in the aftermath of riots at the Capitol. The responsibility of being a CEO today is different than it was decades ago, he said. “The people are watching. Our responsibility is to everyone.”