Global stocks slid along with equity futures Friday amid concerns about volatile retail-trader speculation in the US and a cash squeeze in China. The dollar was set for its biggest weekly gain since October. South Korea bore the brunt of broad-based losses across Asia. European equity contracts sank and S&P 500 futures fell about 1% after the US gauge rebounded Thursday from its worse loss since October. GameStop Corp. and AMC Entertainment Holdings Inc. surged in post-market trading after brokerage Robinhood Markets Inc. said it will ease some curbs on activity in stocks whipsawed by online chatrooms. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Elsewhere, Treasuries were steady with the yield on 10-year notes around 1.05%. Sentiment in the US was boosted Thursday by earnings from the likes of Mastercard Inc. and Comcast Corp. and a surprise drop in jobless claims. Oil retained a decline as the spread of new Covid-19 variants and tighter lockdown measures weighed on nascent hopes of a demand recovery.  Global stocks are set for their worst weekly slide in about three months, partly on the turmoil caused by hoards of day-traders hatching stock bets that roiled hedge funds and strained trading platforms. Some strategists say investors should buy the dip because of the expected stimulus-fueled economic recovery from the pandemic. Others fear an uneven vaccine rollout signals a fragile outlook amid stretched valuations. “There are a lot of reasons to continue to think we may see gains and I’m not negative on the stock market, I would just say that it’s rich in some areas right now,” Michael Cuggino, portfolio manager at Pacific Heights Asset Management LLC, said on Bloomberg TV. “We are long in the tooth with this bull market.” These are the main moves in markets: