Global stocks rose with US equity futures as investors focused on the prospect of additional fiscal stimulus and supportive Federal Reserve policy amid the worsening pandemic. The dollar dipped. Europe’s Stoxx 600 Index opened higher in a broad-based rally. Stocks outperformed in South Korea and Hong Kong. US futures pointed higher, with Nasdaq 100 contracts leading gains ahead of a slew of tech earnings reports this week. Treasury yields edged up. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership.  Global stocks are close to all-time highs as expansive stimulus assuages concerns stemming from additional coronavirus lockdowns and the patchy rollout of vaccines, which has led to a tougher start for the world economy in 2021 than earlier expected. US lawmakers are sparring over President Joe Biden’s proposed $1.9 trillion Covid-19 relief plan but investors continue to expect some additional spending to materialize eventually. Traders are also hoping Fed Chair Jerome Powell will provide reassurance after Wednesday’s policy meeting that $120 billion of monthly bond purchases won’t be tapered any time soon. “Investors see continued open-spigot monetary policy and more fiscal stimulus,” said Marc Chandler, chief market strategist at Bannockburn Global Forex. “Coupled with the vaccine’s rollout, it will generate a critical mass of more robust economic growth as the year progresses.” Global coronavirus cases are nearing the 100 million mark, with the US stepping up surveillance of virus variants to monitor their impact on inoculations. Mexican President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador said in a tweet that he is infected with Covid-19. Hong Kong’s stock market was boosted by a surge in Tencent Holdings Ltd. The Internet giant has become a prime target for traders from mainland China who are flooding record amounts of cash into Hong Kong-listed shares this year. Elsewhere, oil held near $52 a barrel in Asian trading following a surprise gain in US crude stockpiles. Gold dipped and Bitcoin traded at around $33 000 after tumbling last week. These are some key events coming up in the week ahead: These are the main moves in markets: 