Stocks fell along with US and European futures Tuesday on concern over the timeline for President Joe Biden’s fiscal-relief plan and amid warnings about potential asset bubbles. The dollar extended an advance. A gauge of Asia-Pacific equities slid the most in about two months. Hong Kong underperformed, dragged lower by a slump in Tencent Holdings Ltd. after the Internet giant’s market value rose to the cusp of $1 trillion for the first time Monday. In China, shares dropped after the central bank withdrew cash from the banking system and an official cautioned about asset bubbles. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. S&P 500 futures slipped in the wake of comments from Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer that an aid package is unlikely before mid-March. Nasdaq 100 contracts pointed lower ahead of earnings from some of the biggest tech firms. Treasuries held an overnight climb and crude oil fluctuated under $53 a barrel.  Global stocks have retreated from a record as investors look for fresh catalysts to push them higher or at least justify current valuations. That could come from a slate of earnings reports due this week. Meanwhile, the possibility that a US fiscal-relief package might be delayed is undercutting a key reason why Treasury yields climbed earlier this year. “If financial markets needed any further confirmation that the US fiscal stimulus was the only game in town, the buy-everything herd received it overnight,” Jeffrey Halley, senior market analyst at Oanda Asia Pacific Pte., wrote in a note. Disquiet from Senate Republicans over the size of the planned package “was enough to knock equities off their intraday highs,” send bond yields lower and spur demand for the dollar, he said. President Joe Biden said he’s open to negotiation on his $1.9 trillion Covid-19 relief proposal, and is hopeful to bring Republicans behind it, though didn’t rule out pursuing a Democrat-only route. Schumer said earlier Monday he aims to secure passage of the next round of relief by mid-March, just when jobless benefits from the last package will be running out. On the pandemic front, vaccine coverage won’t reach a point that would stop transmission of the virus in the foreseeable future, the World Health Organisation. US infectious-disease chief Anthony Fauci said he’s worried about delays to second doses. These are some key events coming up in the week ahead: These are the main moves in markets: