Emerging-market equities are on fire, yet caution is creeping into other risk assets as rising US Treasury yields keep investors on edge. While the prospect of more US stimulus drove MSCI’s gauge of developing-nation shares to a record on Friday, dollar bonds posted their first weekly decline since October as the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note rose above 1%. Even the momentum that lifted emerging-market currencies to an all-time high faded toward the end of last week as the US dollar strengthened. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. How much higher US yields go has become key to determining where risk assets are headed as the rollout of Covid-19 vaccines brightens the global growth outlook. Investors will keep a close eye on speeches by Federal Reserve officials, including Chair Jerome Powell, this week as well as US inflation and retail sales data for any potential impact. The recent jump in oil prices is also a concern as traders ponder the possibility of accelerating inflation in the coming months and what that could mean for interest rates. “For emerging markets, higher US yields are a negative, so markets need to hear from the Fed that they will not tolerate an excessive rise,” said Henrik Gullberg, a macro-economist at Coex Partners in London. “While higher crude is a positive, as it underpins the terms of trade of commodity producers, it underpins inflation and thus contribute to lower real rates.” Fidelity International has reduced its overweight position in developing-nation debt even as it remains upbeat on the prospects for emerging markets, said Paul Greer, a money manager in London at the firm, which oversees about $611 billion. “We remain more positive on the emerging-market currency side, although we are watching the US dollar and US rates price action very closely here.” “If the markets are beginning to price an unwind of quantitative easing or Fed policy tightening in the near to medium term, it will act as a major headwind for emerging-market risk assets,” Greer said. “However, if it is due to expectations of increased tax, spending and debt issuance in the US it spells less imminent trouble.” Meantime, a slew of December inflation data from developing economies, including China, India, Brazil and Russia will also garner scrutiny. Central banks in South Korea and Peru will probably keep interest rates on hold.