A stronger US dollar is proving to be an early test for emerging-market currencies on the eve of Joe Biden’s inauguration. The greenback gained over the last two weeks, buoyed by the president-elect’s proposal for a $1.9 trillion stimulus package. Most developing-nation currencies have slumped in that span, and history suggests further pain may be in store. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership.  MSCI Inc.’s gauge of emerging-market currencies ended 2020 with its biggest quarterly advance in a decade as optimism over the distribution of Covid-19 vaccines bolstered risk appetite. Now, the backdrop of rising cases, renewed lockdowns and vaccine concerns threatens to reverse those flows. “If vaccines prove less effective than we expect and [the] global economy stumbles, the ‘safe haven’ dollar would likely appreciate,” Goldman Sachs Group Inc. strategists including Zach Pandl wrote in a report. Still, the strategists “expect broad dollar weakness” this year as exposures to risk assets and upside in commodity prices can outweigh the potential drag from higher US rates. One currency of interest to investors is the Turkish lira, which has climbed since hitting a record low in November. On Thursday, the central bank is expected to keep the nation’s one-week repo rate at 17%. “The lira has rallied and reserves are stabilising, providing no reason to raise rates further,” according to Bloomberg Economics. “Still, inflation accelerated in December, limiting the scope for rate cuts.” Policy makers in Malaysia, South Africa and Brazil will also decide on their borrowing costs this week. Meantime, Biden’s return to the White House on Wednesday will carry particular significance for traders who follow relations between the world’s two largest economies. On Friday, the Trump administration announced it would sanction six officials from China and Hong Kong in a parting shot to Beijing. 