The South African Institute of Chartered Accountants (Saica) has revised its annual continuing professional development (CPD) compliance declaration, which must be completed by all chartered accountants and associates who are members of Saica, with effect from January 1 last year. The final deadline for submission is January 31, 2021. “Members/associates who do not comply with this deadline will be reported to Saica’s Legal and Discipline Department,” according to Saica. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The institute introduced CPD requirements a number of years ago. Members initially had the choice of completing an easy-as-pie declaration that they had fulfilled the CPD requirements, or they could opt to declare the courses they completed as they happened, and retain the proof. This new submission is more onerous, and will take far longer than Saica’s estimated five minutes – and members who have not kept their contact details up to date will not have received any emails from Saica containing a link to the annual declaration. The objective of the new CPD policy is to “protect the public interest by ensuring there is a framework within which the members commit to ongoing learning and development throughout their careers, demonstrating the competence required in relation to the specific roles an accountant performs.” CPD pathways to compliance The new CPD policy can be found here. Members should also acquaint themselves with the 202-page Code of Professional Conduct of Saica (revised 2018), which can be found here. When completing the compliance declaration, the member will have to affirm that this document has been read. No exemptions for the professionally active There are no exemptions under the new CPD policy. If you are ‘professionally active’, knuckle down and complete your declaration. The definition of ‘professionally active’ is extremely wide, and includes serving as a director on any board (not defined), or being in any advisory role. A stay-at-home mother who expects to go back to work in a few years will also have to submit an annual declaration. Those chartered accountants who are comfortably retired, but doing the odd accounting job, even if it’s merely completing their aged parents’ tax return, cannot escape either. The minimum CPD requirements are: “Reflection is an integral part of the CPD process. It is especially important if you want to get the best results from your CPD activities,” says Saica. “The planning phase requires you to consider and record your current and future roles and to reflect on the developmental areas that you consider most important for your professional growth and development. Once these areas have been recognised, you will be required to complete CPD activities that fulfil your identified learning needs.” You may draft your own reflective plan, but Saica provides some guidance as summarised here: Tax practitioners Tax practitioners must go the extra mile and also comply with the CPD requirements set out by the South African Revenue Service (Sars): Saica is a registered controlling body (RCB). RCBs must submit to Sars a compliance report of their members who are registered tax practitioners within the prescribed time period. Evidence of the CPD The only documentation you need to retain for Saica is the reflective planning form (you may base this on Saica’s template, or design your own). Ensure that it is relevant, and indicates the “level of reflection recorded in your reflective plan”. This reflective plan must be kept for three calendar years. If you require any assistance in completing your CPD Reflective Plan, you may send an email to newcpdpolicy@saica.co.za.