Pepco Group, which owns British discount retailer Poundland, has targeted 400 store openings across Europe in its 2020-21 financial year as it expands its PEPCO brand beyond central and eastern Europe, its boss said on Friday. The group opened a net 327 new stores in its 2019-20 year, taking the total to 3 021 in 15 countries. The PEPCO brand entered western Europe for the first time with openings in Italy and it plans its first foray into Spain in April or May. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Chief Executive Andy Bond said its five stores in Italy have traded “super well” so far. “That’s given us a lot of confidence that we can now start building PEPCO into western Europe and that expands our market opportunity from roughly 100 million people (in central and eastern Europe) to roughly 500 million people,” he told Reuters. To further illustrate the brand’s potential he noted that the group has more than 1 000 PEPCO shops in Poland, which has a significantly smaller population and gross domestic product than Italy or Spain. The company, which also owns the Dealz brand in Europe but does not trade online, has already opened more than 100 of the targeted 400 new stores this financial year. Pepco Group is part of South African conglomerate Steinhoff , which is still battling the fallout of a 2017 accounting scandal. Since 2019 Steinhoff and its creditors have been evaluating a range of strategic options for Pepco Group, including a potential public listing, private equity sale or trade sale. That process was delayed by the pandemic, but Steinhoff said last month that it had resumed. “The business will be up for sale at the right time. It’s a case of when, rather than if,” said Bond, a former boss of British supermarket chain Asda. Pepco Group on Friday reported a 31% drop in full-year core earnings, citing temporary coronavirus-related store closures. Underlying earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA) were 229 million euros ($277 million) for the year to September 30, against 331 million euros the previous year. Sales rose 3% to 3.5 billion euros, reflecting new store openings.