A survey by marketing experts who usually focus on consumer behaviour and urge businesses to “get into [their] clients’ heads” has delivered statistics showing the majority of people in SA are having difficulty coping with the Covid-19 pandemic, the economic outlook, and their personal finances. While it set out to explain the mindset of South Africans so that companies could shape their communication to clients effectively, the results of an online survey of 2 000 respondents indicated that what people really have on their minds is a long list of concerns. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Interestingly, their biggest concern is not the coronavirus, but rather unemployment, crime, poverty, the economic outlook and corruption. Covid-19 only came in at number six on the list of worries, just before drug and alcohol abuse, climate change and HIV. The survey by ovatoyou, headed by marketing specialist Amanda Reekie, posed questions to a sample group of 2 000 people in its database of 18 000 members. The report points out that the results represent the views of online South Africans (rather than the overall population), a distinction that is quickly vanishing with everybody moving online at a rapid pace. Sociability The survey has found that the majority of people have reduced their social behaviour due to the coronavirus pandemic. “What would have been completely foreign at the start of 2020, is now commonplace,” noted the research team. Some of the findings in this regard are: There have also been changes in the way people are working and children are learning. More than 20% of people are working remotely – a concept that was out of the ordinary just a few months ago – and more children are doing online schooling or home schooling (18%). The report notes that 38% of respondents said they earn less than R10 000 per month or are not working at all, prompting the researchers to conclude that their work could not be done remotely and that online schooling might be too expensive. Spending That 64% of people say they limit going out has huge implications for businesses such as retailers and restaurants, and the landlords of those establishments. Reekie says that while online shopping in South Africa was already seeing noteworthy gains before Covid-19 hit, the past 10 months has seen it go through the roof. “The rate of adoption by consumers and adaptation by brands [is] encouraging. The new shopping behaviours are being firmly entrenched. “You just have to look at a key shopping period such as Black Friday to get an idea of the trend: while cash or card-based sales were down in stores in November, they rocketed online by as much as 60%,” says Reekie. She refers to retailers’ recent trading updates as further proof of the trend. The Foschini Group reported that 14.4% of its total local turnover came from online sales, with online sales across all its territories growing from 8% in 2019 to 12% in 2020. Woolworths reported the same trend when releasing its trading update that included Black Friday and the festive season. In the 26 weeks to December it recorded 159% growth in online sales for food and 118% growth in clothing sales. The ovatoyou survey found that 43% of respondents took to online buying and have bought clothing or shoes online; just 17% indicated that they only shop in stores. “This is particularly noteworthy as historically it was thought that clothing and shoes were not categories that were a natural fit for online selling,” says Reekie. “Consumers are discovering that shopping online, from the comfort and safety of their own homes, is easy and convenient, especially when essentially under house arrest. And many more brands now offer this service through enhanced e-commerce platforms.” The same goes for online grocery shopping with Reekie mentioning that Woolworths, Checkers and Pick n Pay have all improved their digital platforms lately. “It appears they are listening to their customers and have responded with solutions that are more robust, with a convenient, efficient digital app solution that also allows consumers to book a timeslot for delivery,” comments Reekie. Only 46% of the 2 000 ovatoyou sample said they only shop in-store – meaning that more than half of retailers’ customers have moved online. However, one must realise that the survey itself was done online and the findings might not be applicable to the whole population. Property market However, the changes might impact on the property market. “All of this change affects retail and mall space, with brands needing to modify the use of their stores, downsize and/or increase warehousing capacity. “Demand for retail space and warehousing, not to mention parking, will definitely change and this will have a knock-on effect on the property sector as tenants move to smaller shops, leaving large stores unoccupied – something that can be seen in many malls around the country,” says Reekie. The survey also discovered other changes in consumer behaviour. It found that 19% of South Africans now say they favour smaller, local providers for shopping rather than the traditional big retailers. In addition, it seems that social media platforms such as Instagram and Facebook are becoming more important in consumers’ decision making process. The state of us as nation What makes the survey interesting is the findings with regards to people’s perception of life in SA right now. It is telling that Covid-19 is now way down on the list of concerns while a similar ovatoyou survey in May last year found it one of the top concerns. Most people now think that unemployment, crime, poverty and corruption are the big problems. The majority of the sample feel that SA cannot afford more lockdowns, with 64% saying the economy is in dire straits and another 6% believing that lockdowns are not even effective. The survey findings give an idea of how people are feeling now and elicited insightful statistics and responses: The authors of the report on the survey results have come to the conclusion that people are tired, hopeless, often broke and fragile. Companies can expect more “irrational outbursts” when a product or service does not meet expectations, according to the report. Within this crisis, there are opportunities to reimagine and adapt businesses. “Never in our lifetime has it been more important to be agile, adaptive and creative when solving customers’ problems,” say the experts. Or, as one of the respondents noted in her answer to a question: “The lockdown has changed my personal view of life, seeing that life can change within minutes.”