After a one-month trial of 2021, the shoppers of emerging-market assets can point to any number of reasons for wanting their money back. Yet the balance of evidence suggests they’ll stick with the product for a while. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. For all the factors that triggered last week’s selloff, the prospect of stronger growth ahead as stimulus kicks in, vaccines are distributed and restrictions lifted continues to underpin confidence. Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Societe Generale SA and Loomis Sayles & Co. were among those talking up emerging markets in the past week, even as the Cboe Volatility Index had its biggest daily jump in about three years on Wednesday. “I see the current backup as an opportunity to fade weakness, rather than the start of another sustained leg down,” said Ilya Gofshteyn, a senior emerging-markets strategist at Standard Chartered in New York. “Assets can rally once US equity market volatility rolls over. Emerging-market currencies were on the back foot even ahead of the recent spike in VIX, so positioning is much cleaner now.”  MSCI Inc.’s gauge of developing-nation shares had the worst week since March in the five days through Friday, falling 4.5%, as the uneven rollout of inoculation programs and gyrations brought about by retail traders in US markets sapped risk appetite. Investor anxiety, as measured by expected price swings for equities, reached the highest in almost three months last week even as Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell pledged to keep monetary spigots wide open. Implied volatilities across emerging-market currency pairs jumped on Friday, while local bonds fell for a third straight week. February may still get off to a rocky start. Kicking off a week of economic releases, an official gauge of China’s manufacturing output slipped for a second month in January, while activity in the services sector slowed to the lowest reading since March, data published on the weekend showed. Most Middle East markets retreated Sunday.