Last year’s gains in Tesla are far from over as the company consolidates its leadership position in the EV industry in multi-trillion dollar markets, one Wall Street analyst said on Monday. Piper Sandler’s Alexander Potter more than doubled his price target on the electric vehicle maker to $1,200 from $515, the latest in a string of similar moves by several analysts, who expect the Elon Musk-led company to grow aggressively. Potter’s target is now the highest among the more than 40 analysts who cover the stock, according to Bloomberg data. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. “With Tesla’s target industries still embracing outdated business models, it may be decades before this company runs out of new opportunities to pursue,” Potter wrote in a note to clients. The analyst maintained his buy-equivalent rating on the stock. After rising more than 8-fold last year, Tesla shares are up an additional 19% in 2021 after reporting strong delivery numbers for the fourth quarter. However, the stock pared some of its best gains after profit for the period disappointed and the company refrained from providing a specific delivery guidance for 2021. Tesla shares rose 5.8% to $839.81 on Monday.  Analysts have yet to catch up with the rapid gains in Tesla shares over the past 12 months, with the average price target on the stock still far below the levels at which the shares are currently trading. Moreover, opinions among analysts about how much Tesla’s stock should be worth — with Potter’s $1,200 at one end and J.P. Morgan analyst Ryan Brinkman’s $135 target on the other — vary widely. The surge in Tesla’s share price led investors to hunt for smaller EV players and startups, at a time when the sector also benefited from a growing acceptance among analysts and others that electric cars will dominate the automotive industry, with governments around the world announcing policies to encourage the phasing out of gas-fueled cars. Potter expects Tesla to deliver 894 000 vehicles in 2021, eventually increasing to more than 9 million units in 2030, making it among the top-3 automakers globally. The analyst also expects to see a steady ramp up in the adoption of Tesla’s full self-driving (FSD) software starting in 2030, with more than half of all Tesla owners using the FSD package by the end of 2040. Morgan Stanley analyst Adam Jonas also raised his price target on Tesla to $880 from $810 on Monday, citing expectations of higher revenue from the core automotive business and the potential growth of the company’s energy segment. Jonas maintained the buy-equivalent rating on the stock.