Oil prices will stage a steady recovery this year as vaccines reach more people and speed an economic revival, with further impetus coming from stimulus and output discipline by top crude producers, a Reuters poll showed on Friday. The survey of 55 participants forecast Brent crude would average $59.07 per barrel in 2021, up from last month’s $54.47 forecast. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. This is the biggest month-on-month upward revision for the yearly forecast in Reuters polls going back until at least 2016. Brent has averaged around $58.80 so far this year. “Travel and leisure activity look set to catch up to buoyant manufacturing activity due to the mix of stimulus, confidence, vaccines, and more targeted pandemic measures,” said Norbert Ruecker of Julius Baer. “Against these demand dynamics, the supply side is unlikely to catch up on time, leaving the oil market in tightening mode for months to come.” Of the 41 respondents who participated in both the February and January polls, 32 raised their forecasts. Most analysts said the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries and allies (OPEC+) may ease current output curbs when they meet on March 4, but would still agree to maintain supply discipline. “With OPEC+ endeavouring to keep global oil production below demand, inventories should continue falling this year and allow prices to rise further,” said UBS analyst Giovanni Staunovo. Oil demand was seen growing by 5-7 million barrels per day in 2021, as per the poll. However, experts said any deterioration in the Covid-19 situation and the possible lifting of US sanctions on Iran could hold back oil’s recovery. The poll forecast US crude to average $55.93 per barrel in 2021 versus January’s $51.42 consensus. Analysts expect US production to rise moderately this year, although new measures from US President Joe Biden to tame the oil sector could curb output in the long run. “A structural shift away from fossil fuels” may prevent oil from returning to the highs of previous decades, said Economist Intelligence Unit analyst Cailin Birch.