US equity futures reversed declines and Asian stocks climbed Monday as concern receded over volatile retail trading and signs of an easing cash crunch in China aided sentiment. Silver futures surged. S&P 500 contracts reversed an earlier drop of more than 1% to trade higher with European futures. Traders fretting about the implications of short-squeezes stirred up on internet forums helped push US shares lower on Friday. Silver futures advanced 6% after the metal became the latest focus of such chatter. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Stocks in South Korea and Hong Kong outperformed. The onshore yuan slipped and Chinese stocks fluctuated after the People’s Bank of China injected funds in an effort to avoid a liquidity squeeze. The dollar edged lower and the yield on 10-year Treasuries ticked higher.  Global stocks retreated last week as retail trading caused havoc in some US shares and a patchy vaccine rollout raised risks for the global recovery from the pandemic. Data showed factory activity across much of Asia continued to hold up in January even as China’s output showed signs of moderating. Silver spiked after retail sites were overwhelmed with demand for bars and coins at the weekend. Comments on Reddit forum r/WallStreetBets suggested people buy exchange-traded funds linked to the metal because prices have been kept artificially low. “Risk sentiment is trying to return to its typical bias,” Steve Innes, chief market strategist at Axi, said. “The street is gingerly buying back those positions that got squeezed out last week after deleveraging ran roughshod over the market. So after a weekend to figure out the mess, buy strategies attempt to walk the path of least resistance again.” Meantime, 10 Republican senators have proposed an alternative plan for Covid-19 stimulus costing about $600 billion. On the virus front, infections continued to show a slowing trend across some regions of the world, including in the US, though concerns remain about new variants. These are some key events coming up: Here are the main moves in markets: