Asian stocks retreated with US futures Thursday and Chinese shares pared gains as traders weighed the implications of the recent jump in Treasury yields. Crude oil and copper jumped. Stocks in South Korea and Hong Kong underperformed, while those in China, reopening after the Lunar New Year break, gave up earlier gains. S&P 500 futures retreated after the index closed flat. European contracts slipped. The Nasdaq 100 ended lower Wednesday amid concern about the impact of higher yields on tech share valuations. The dollar edged up. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Ten-year Treasury yields were steady after reaching 1.33% Wednesday and then retreating. Crude oil touched $62 a barrel as the damage to US output from a cold blast morphed into a global supply shock. Copper in London hit an eight-year high as China’s traders returned from the holiday, with metals markets already buoyed by hopes for an economic recovery from the pandemic.  The recent dramatic rise in bond yields has investors wondering afresh how high they can climb before spoiling the risk rally. That adds to concerns that speculative froth may be setting equities up for a fall. Still, with vaccines being rolled out and economic activity picking up around the world, investors continue to bet on share market gains while shifting more into cyclical stocks. “An uptrend in Treasury yields remains in place as investors are still betting on the US economic recovery as vaccinations proceed,” said Eiichiro Miura, general manager of the fixed-income department at Nissay Asset Management Corp. in Tokyo. “US stocks have come down a bit but we can’t say that risk-off sentiment has returned as commodity prices, including crude oil, have remained strong.” While some recent data highlighted momentum in the US economy, Federal Reserve officials didn’t see the conditions for reducing their massive asset-purchase program being met for “some time” at their January policy meeting, a record of the gathering released Wednesday showed. These are some of the main moves in markets: