Global equities reached another record and Treasury yields rose after Janet Yellen pushed for rapid US stimulus and coronavirus infections slowed across the globe. The dollar steadied after Friday’s slide. US and European futures advanced after the S&P 500 closed at a record on Friday. Most Asian stocks climbed. Japan’s Topix index jumped the most in more than two months to close at its highest since 1991 amid reports that the government may lift its state of emergency early for some areas. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Treasury Secretary Yellen said on Sunday talk shows that the US can return to full employment in 2022 if it enacts a robust enough relief package. Ten-year Treasury yields crept higher toward 1.2%. The pace of US inflation implied by the bond market advanced to its highest level since 2014, as crude oil prices rallied. Brent oil rose above $60 a barrel for the first time in a year.  Investors are taking comfort from the continued rollout of vaccines and data suggesting a declining trend in infections in countries like the US and Germany. A Citigroup Inc. gauge of global risk aversion has dropped to its lowest since the pandemic first roiled markets last year. While the weaker-than-forecast US jobs data Friday reinforced the fragility of the recovery as the pandemic lingers, it also highlighted the case for further stimulus. “Risk sentiment brightened as anticipation over the US stimulus package is growing,” said Masahiro Ichikawa, chief market strategist at Sumitomo Mitsui DS Asset Management Co. “Although the scale of the US package is likely to be reduced, the amount will be still substantial to bolster the US economy.” Here are some key events coming up: These are the main moves in markets