JSE-listed Murray & Roberts (M&R) still expects to make a profit from its investment in the Bombela Concession Company (BCC), the operator of the Gautrain, despite the Budget Review proclaiming that the private operator of the Gautrain is expected to lose about R700 million in 2020/21. M&R has a 50% shareholding in the BBC, which holds the 15-year concession for operating and maintaining the Gautrain. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The remaining shareholding in the BBC is owned by broad-based black economic empowerment company Strategic Partners Group (SPG) (38%) and Calshelf (12%), a part of the empowered J&J Group. M&R earlier this week reported that its financial results for the six months to end-December 2020 were negatively affected by prolonged Covid-19 lockdown restrictions. The group said it expects to report a decline in total earnings a share and headline earnings a share for this reporting period compared to the six months to end-December 2019, which ended before the outbreak of the pandemic. M&R attributed the decline in earnings to a prolonged Covid-19 restrictions impact, especially in the mining platform, a disappointing result by the power, industrial and water platform, “as well as a lower fair value adjustment profit from the investment in the Bombela Concession Company”. However, M&R is anticipating making lower profit – and not a loss – from its investment in the BCC. M&R Group Investor and media executive Ed Jardim said on Thursday the group is in a closed period but he could confirm that M&R took 100% of the forecasted impact of Covid-19 on its investment in the BCC in the previous financial year. “We will reassess the impact for this current year. As mentioned in our trading statement, we do expect a lower fair value adjustment profit from the investment in the Bombela Concession Company this year,” he said. M&R in August 2020 reported that its earnings for the year to June 2020 were dented by a R197 million earnings knock from low ridership levels on the Gautrain. The group said this week it expects to report a diluted headline earnings loss of between 24 and 31 cents per share for the six months to end-December 2020 compared to the 40 cents per share profit in the previous corresponding period. However, M&R stressed that, as announced in its business update published in November 2020, results for the second half of its 2021 financial year are expected to be better than for the first half, especially as “adaption to declining Covid-19 restrictions increases and work commences on recently awarded contracts”. “Considering the group’s record, quality order book of R60.5 billion (FY2020 R54.2 billion) and near orders of R19.9 billion (FY2020 R11.4 billion) as at December 2020, it is well positioned for a strong return to profitability in FY2022 and to achieve meaningful earnings growth in the short to medium term,” it said. M&R expects to publish its interim financial results on March 3, 2021. Shares in M&R rose 1.54% on Thursday to close at R7.90. The Budget Review released on Wednesday said passenger demand on the Gautrain in November 2020 was 30% of pre-Covid-19 levels after a slow recovery from the shutdown of all rail transport during the strict lockdown. The review said the Gautrain has a patronage guarantee as part of the public private partnership (PPP) agreement signed with the BCC. A patronage guarantee is a subsidy provided when the private operator’s total revenue is below a contractually agreed amount. The shortfall between actual revenue generated by the Gautrain and the level from which the patronage guarantee applies is carried by BCC. The review said the private operator is partly liable for losses if revenue drops below a certain amount. “In 2020/21, the private operator is expected to lose about R700 million and the provincial government’s patronage guarantee is expected to exceed its current budget by R400 million,” it said. The review said the Gauteng Department of Roads and Transport is expected to absorb this amount, adding that the number of people using public transport is projected to remain below pre-Covid-19 levels for some time as a result of slow economic growth and the probability that more people will continue to work from home. “The overall impact of Covid-19 on projects such as the Gautrain is unknown and will need to be assessed and quantified in future,” it said. Read: Infrastructure spending boost in the budget LIVE ARCHIVE: Watch the Budget speech