Just less than a year ago President Cyril Ramaphosa’s plans were upended by the Covid-19 pandemic. The arrival of the deadly virus could not have come at a worse time. The country’s economy was already stalling and the government’s fiscal position was becoming precarious. But even with Covid-19 forcing a change in priorities, the state, judging by the goals set out in the president’s 2020 State of the Nation Address (Sona) still managed to achieve some of its most notable goals – such as the opening-up of the electricity market. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Eskom is on its way to being split up, municipalities can source their own electricity and the network is now open to independent power producers. When it comes to bringing the corrupt to order, the creation of a “fusion centre”, which is an amalgamation of investigative and prosecuting authorities, has already resulted in several cases being brought to trial. The industry “master plans” have also paid off. There is now expanded capacity in the poultry sector, carmakers have invested billions of rands, and the clothing industry has invested more than half a billion rand to expand local manufacturing facilities. When it comes to rural development, the government has redistributed over 5 million hectares of land, totalling around 5 500 farms, to more than 300 000 beneficiaries. Despite these successes, there are several disappointments. The state-owned enterprises (SOEs) are generally still a mess, the Climate Bill still has to be made law, and the mooted establishment of a Crime Detection University has been tired up in red tape. The Covid-19 crisis also seemingly postponed some of the government’s most ambitious projects. There was no mention of a state bank and a sovereign wealth fund in the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS). There was mention of National Health Insurance in the MTBPS, but it was noted that “capacity building” within the national Department of Health had been delayed. There was also somewhat of an oddity in last year’s and this year’s address. For two years in a row, Ramaphosa said the waiting period for getting a water usage licence was reduced to 90 days. Maybe he should speak to his officials because in November 2019, the Department of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation already announced that it had cut down the time spent on processing water use licence applications to 49 days. For more on what was promised versus what was delivered see below: Eskom Climate change Treasury According to the MTBPS, there are also plans to improve fiscal stability, which will see government develop a “comprehensive public-sector remuneration strategy for the medium- to long term”, which will “include public office bearers, state-owned companies, public entities and local government.” Its goal is to speed up implementation of priority reforms determined by the president. SOEs “The council will review business models, capital structure and sources of financing for SOEs and monitor and mitigate risks,” said acting spokesperson Tyrone Seale. Railways South African Airways (SAA) Water Ports New university Police and National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) The centre has brought many cases to trial and preserved or recovered millions of rands in public funds. The Act allowed for new institutions to be established as either higher education colleges or university colleges. The decision on whether this institution would be established as a university college or a higher education college would be dependent on the outcome of a feasibility study that should first be undertaken. In 2019/2020, a total number of 1 153 from a total of 1 154 police stations rendered a victim-friendly service to victims of rape, sexual offences, domestic violence and abuse. There are 1 090 victim-friendly rooms, including 1 001 at police stations, 38 at satellite police stations, one at a contact point, two at international airports and 48 at family violence, child protection and sexual offences units. Youth development SMMEs Master plans Nearly half of the procurement spend on construction of the bulk earthworks and top structure at the Tshwane Special Economic Zone during this phase is expected to be allocated for SMMEs, an amount equal to R1.7 billion in procurement opportunities. Toyota has invested in its KwaZulu-Natal facility to start production of the first generation of hybrid electric vehicles to come off a South African assembly line. This follows investment announcements by Nissan, Mercedes Benz and Isuzu in expanded production facilities, all of which cement South Africa’s position as a global player in auto manufacturing. SA now produces an additional one million chickens every week. Through the implementation of the plan, last year saw a rise in local production and a decline in imported sugar, creating stability for an industry which employs some 85 000 workers. Support for small-scale black farmers is being stepped up, with a large beverage producer committing to expand their procurement sharply. Land and agriculture To date, government has redistributed over 5 million hectares of land, totalling around 5 500 farms, to more than 300 000 beneficiaries. This is in addition to the land restitution process, which has benefited over two million land claimants and resulted in the transfer of around 2.7 million hectares. We are also pursuing programmes to assist smallholder and emerging farmers with market access, to develop skills across the entire agricultural value chain and increase the number of commercial black farmers. Health 