On December 2 last year an unprecedented 58.68% of FirstRand shareholders voted against the remuneration implementation report at the banking group’s AGM. In addition just over 30% voted against the remuneration policy. It was a tense meeting dominated by heated discussion of FirstRand’s remuneration policy with the level of opposition appearing to be an entirely novel experience for the board. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. At the previous AGM only 19.5% of shareholders had voted against implementation of the remuneration policy which meant the board was able to escape the indignity of having to invite shareholders to a teleconference to discuss their concerns that year. The JSE requires such an “engagement with shareholders” if less than 75% of them vote in support of the remuneration policy or the implementation report. Last week FirstRand held that engagement – it was a teleconference hosted by the group’s chair Rodger Jardine and the chair of the remuneration committee, Louis von Zeuner. Remarkably, despite the unprecedented number of shareholders indicating concerns about FirstRand’s executive remuneration, a mere 2.18% of the bank’s shareholders bothered to attend. The shockingly low turnout by shareholders could be attributable to one or more of a number of factors. It could be that the parties who manage the pension funds and unit trusts making up a large percentage of FirstRand’s shareholders aren’t that concerned about the issue; that these institutional entities rely on proxy advisory services who do nothing more than recommend how to vote on a resolution and offer no follow-up facility; or that the largest of these institutions have the luxury of direct and private access to the FirstRand board to discuss their concerns and so do not bother with broader engagements. There’s also the suspicion among some shareholders that the engagements lead nowhere. Ambivalence This is certainly not the first time shareholders have voted in large numbers against a company’s remuneration policy and then not bothered to attend the follow-up engagement; PSG’s Piet Mouton is one of many CEOs to express frustration about shareholders’ seeming ambivalence on the issue. It is possible that institutional shareholders, alert to the fact that their voting records are now open to public scrutiny, use the remuneration vote as a form of virtue-signaling. But, as with all virtue-signaling, the superficiality of its commitment does not include sufficient effort to attend a follow-up engagement. Whatever the explanation, the reality is that the current regulations aimed at restraining out-of-control executive pay are utterly ineffective. FirstRand’s Sens statement announcing that it had held the meeting appeared keen to dismiss its relevance: “A total of five shareholders, cumulatively holding 2.18% of FirstRand’s total issued shares, participated in the call.” The bank tells Moneyweb the issues raised were exactly the same as those at the AGM. However it seems that, as in most post-AGM remuneration-related “engagements with shareholders”, there was little attempt to understand shareholders’ concerns. If the JSE-regulated engagements are proving ineffectual, which appears to be the case given the large number of companies that regularly notch up 25%-plus opposition to remuneration at consecutive AGMs, perhaps it is time for a tougher regime. Currently South Africa has one of the most lax in the world. However a tougher, and more appropriate, regime could be on the cards. Beefing up the Companies Act Proposed amendments to the Companies Act would bring South African into line with Australia. “Where the remuneration report is rejected by at least 25% of the votes cast in respect of a resolution for the approval of the director’s remuneration at two successive shareholders’ meetings, the directors’ committee responsible for remuneration matters of the company shall resign as members of that committee,” says the Companies Amendment Bill. According to the proposed amendment the board must reconstitute a new committee within 40 business days and the members that resigned are not eligible for reappointment to that committee for 2 years. In the absence of such a change the current two non-binding advisory votes on remuneration will do nothing more than offer institutional shareholders an opportunity for some ineffectual virtue-signaling. And will increase the growing level of cynicism about efforts to rein in executive pay. Read: Proposed bill amendments could expose SA’s wage gap Meanwhile FirstRand shareholders will be hoping the board, and the remuneration committee in particular, have listened to their concerns and will move to prevent future windfalls. Much of last year’s opposition to FirstRand’s remuneration implementation report was due to anger about the generous “Covid-19 instrument” designed to help compensate executives for the failure of long-term incentives to pay out. The hit to last year’s earnings, which was heavily influenced by the bank’s decision to make much heftier provisions than usual, meant incentives awarded in 2017 fell short of the 2020 earnings targets. Cynics might say given that the SA Reserve Bank had called on banks to halt dividend payouts and bonuses during the pandemic, a solid earnings performance might have been pointless from an executive remuneration perspective. FirstRand’s shareholders will want to ensure that at the very least, future decisions to release some of these provisions will be taken into consideration by the remuneration committee when it determines the earnings target for the payment of long-term incentives.