A peculiar court case eventually came to a conclusion in the Supreme Court of Appeal at the end of January: the multi-billion euro Swatch Group took on the multi-billion dollar Apple Inc in an argument over the registration of a trade mark in SA. The court was tasked with “considerations relevant to a determination of whether the (trade) marks are confusingly or deceptively similar” in terms of the Trade Marks Act 194 of 1993. The trade marks under consideration were the well-known Swatch and the equally familiar iWatch. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read: Swatch declines as Chinese lose appetite for Swiss watches (2019) The Swiss watch manufacturer Swatch objected over the registration of iWatch as a trade mark by the US Apple group, tabling an argument that the two names are too similar and will confuse consumers. After the usual conferences and filings of motions by the representatives of the two very rich clients – lawyers are partial to big offices, expensive whisky and new cars – judge Fabricius of the Gauteng Division of the High Court ruled that the case had no merit. Not surprisingly, the Supreme Court of Appeal agreed with Fabricius and told Swatch to pay the costs of the failed appeal. Swatch was already on the hook for the legal costs of the parties’ outing to the High Court. The case started when Apple applied to register IWATCH as a trade mark in SA, to which Swatch objected as it had already registered ‘Swatch’ as a trade mark in the same category. (Court documents refer to SWATCH and IWATCH). In essence, Swatch contended that the IWATCH and SWATCH marks are confusingly similar and thus the IWATCH mark, in respect of the classes of goods for which registration was sought, was likely to deceive or cause confusion (according to court documents). In response to Swatch’s opposition, the Registrar of Trade Marks referred the case to the high court as required by relevant legislation. Judge Fabricius dismissed Swatch’s opposition to the registration with costs, quoting a similar case between two paint manufacturers. However, he granted leave to appeal his judgment. The Supreme Court of Appeal’s documents make for more interesting reading. In his judgement, Judge David Unterhalter, concurring with three other supreme court judges, focused on the central issue of whether the two names “are deceptively or confusingly similar”. “What are the visual, aural and conceptual similarities of the marks? How would the marks be perceived by the average consumer, in the relevant market, who is reasonably well-informed and observant, taking account of the type of goods and how they are marketed?” asked Unterhalter. He said in his judgment that the consumer may not encounter the goods bearing the marks at the same time and place, and that allowance should be made for the consumer’s imperfect recollection of the marks. While the judge did not elaborate much on the issue, his view seems obvious. Apple’s smart watch, selling for around R10 000, is predominantly found in Apple stores. Swatch watches, starting at less than R2 000 each, are mostly sold online and in dedicated Swatch outlets. Read: Majority of Apple Watch owners plan to give it as a gift (2015) “The degree of similarity of the goods should be considered in relation to the degree of similarity of the marks,” continued Unterhalter. “The greater the similarity of the goods, the more it may offset some differences in the marks, just as greater distinctiveness of the goods may require greater similarity of the marks in order to justify an affirmative finding of the likelihood of confusion.” Swatch focused on the similarities in the names. “Both trade marks consist only of letters and they employ no logos or other distinguishing matter, although Swatch frequently uses its mark in conjunction with a reproduction of the Swiss national flag. “Both have the common element of WATCH, preceded by a single-letter prefix. That one mark starts with an S and the other with an I does little to provide visual differentiation. Neither SWATCH nor IWATCH have any meaning, at least when used in relation to watches,” according to the court documents. Swatch says in its application to the court (as quoted in the Supreme Court of Appeal documents) that these are the very goods covered by Apple’s Class 14 application and they are identical to the goods covered by Swatch’s Class 14 registered mark, that is to say, ‘horological and chromatic instruments; watches; clocks; timepieces’. Read: Apple is said to plan sleep tracking feature for future watch (2019) It was up to the judges at Supreme Court of Appeal to make a visual, aural and conceptual comparison of the marks. Both parties agreed beforehand that they would not enter oral arguments. Unterhalter said that in deciding the matter, he discarded from consideration any preconceived notions associated with two such well-known brands in the market. “The ubiquity and durability of the two brands might give rise to an implicit assumption of their distinctiveness, with the impermissible entailment that the two marks at issue in this case are distinctive and hence are not confusingly similar. “The court’s obligation is to compare the marks themselves and not to permit something external to the marks to intrude upon the process of comparison,” said Unterhalter in his judgment. He found that, visually, both “names make use of a common element, the word ‘WATCH’, which does make for some visual similarity”. “However, the use of the same descriptive word, of a commonplace item, serves to place greater emphasis on the significance of the prefix in each of the marks. It is the ‘I’ in IWATCH that is the visual differentiator of the mark. So too, the joining of ‘S’ to ‘WATCH’, to make up the word ‘SWATCH’, provides a visual cue based on the word rather than its component parts. These features of the marks give rise to a clear visual differentiation,” he said in his ruling. While the judge had to ignore everything besides the two trade marks before him, the history of the Swatch trade mark is interesting, and does little to bolster Swatch’s arguments in court. Swatch Group recounts that the name was borne when the founders of the company set out to produce a cheaper Swiss watch – a (s)econd watch – to counter the competition from cheap quartz and digital Japanese watches back in the 1980s. History also shows that Swatch lovers bought several “second” watches each and Swatch watches became collectible items. The small start-up watch company became a huge success and the founders became multi-billionaires the likes of which are included in the Forbes lists of rich people. How do you pronounce that? While the court did not consider history, the aural comparison of the two trade marks also did little to further Swatch’s case. “The ‘I’ joined to ‘WATCH’ makes up a word of two syllables pronounced, without phonetic exactitude, as ‘eyewatch’ or ‘ayewatch’. That sounds very different from the monosyllabic word SWATCH, when spoken,” said Unterhalter in his judgment. He said that “something” was made by Apple of the fact that swatch is an ordinary word in the English language meaning a small sample of fabric intended to demonstrate the look of a larger piece, but he seemed to have disregarded this argument. “I am doubtful that the average consumer would readily call to mind an association between a watch and a small sample of fabric.” And, he concluded, there is good reason to avoid attaching exclusive rights to common words, such as ‘watch’. He spelled it out: “Swatch is the proprietor in SA of the trade mark SWATCH. The trade mark registration is endorsed as follows: ‘Applicants admit that registration of this trade mark shall not debar other persons from the bona fide descriptive use in the ordinary course of trade of the word WATCH.’ Swatch enjoys no exclusive right to the use of the word WATCH.” The judge also referred to Swatch’s emphasis that its watches are unique in terms of their engineering and marketing. Swatch even supplied examples of its advertising of Swatch watches when it originally filing its legal challenge. “That material is clearly directed at discerning, fashion conscious consumers. Apple’s descriptions of its product range in the answering affidavit leaves little doubt that these products are innovative offerings, also made for discerning consumers. “These consumers are likely to be more affluent and more concerned with the precise brand of watch they require. Consumers of this kind are less likely to be deceived or confused by the limited similarities between the (trade) marks,” said Unterhalter. Read: How not to be a jerk while wearing the Apple watch (2015) Apple also argued that the likelihood of confusion was low as Apple has established a family of i-prefix trade marks over the last 15 years. (Think iPod, iPhone, iPad, iTunes, and iCloud.) In short, its seems obvious that Swatch had little chance of success, which raises the question: Why did they challenge Apple? Swatch did not want to answer questions, only replying by e-mail to refer Moneyweb to the Swatch website. One question was whether Swatch watches are still popular and how many they sell. Swatch Group seems a bit secretive about numbers. The annual report – as entertaining to read as a novel – mentions that Swatch has sold hundreds of millions and that it registered several thousand fans. In comparison, Apple has sold 33 million of its smart watches to date. In addition, Apple only markets its watches as Apple Watch, and not as iWatch. And ever if Apple did, it still leaves the question of why Swatch, arguably the brand leader in this case, bothered to pursue a weak case.