The embattled Emfuleni municipality based in Vanderbijlpark, which owes Eskom about R3 billion, is at risk of losing its licence to distribute electricity. Electricity sales form one of the biggest sources of income for municipalities and if Emfuleni loses the right to do it, other delinquent municipalities will be very concerned. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Energy regulator Nersa will on Thursday host a public hearing more than a year after business formations from the Vaal areas reliant on Emfuleni for power asked it to urgently address Emfuleni’s non-compliance with its licence conditions. They want Eskom to take over. Nersa has also served Eskom with notice that it plans to sit as a tribunal to consider the application from the Vaal Triangle Services Forum (VTSF), which is supported by the local business chamber The members of the forum include businesses like CBI Electrical, African Cables, DCD, Hall Longmore, M-Tec and Scaw Metals. A Nersa tribunal has the power to fine non-compliant licencees as much as R2 million per day for as long as the non-compliance continues. In the meantime, the VTSF has also joined a court application by Eskom for an order to compel Nersa to recover Emfuleni’s licence and award it to Eskom. The forum has proposed an alternative – namely to force-amend Emfuleni’s licence with a condition that it appoints Eskom as its agent for electricity distribution. Eskom would then collect the revenue, deduct its portion, and pay the rest to Emfuleni. The forum says once Emfuleni is back on its feet, it could approach Nersa for the removal of such condition. Failures According to the forum Emfuleni is contravening its licence conditions by failing to: Eskom has been threatening for years to cut electricity supply to Emfuleni, but business was able to prevent this when it obtained an interdict against Eskom in 2018. In terms of the court order big businesses have been paying their electricity bills directly to Eskom since then. The court ordered Nersa to supervise the process. Even though Emfuleni was placed under administration, and despite efforts since 2015 by several other government institutions to have the dispute between the municipality and Eskom resolved, the situation has continued to deteriorate. In March last year Eskom had Emfuleni property attached in lieu of some of the debt and one of the municipality’s other service providers had its bank account attached late last year to address outstanding payments of about R500 million. Read: Emfuleni: Eskom not half done taking municipality’s cars, furniture (Mar 2020) The forum is not impressed by Nersa’s belated efforts. They doubt it will make much of a difference. The municipality has no money, and imposing huge fine on it will only worsen the situation, they argue. Emfuleni is neither financially nor administratively and technically capable of complying with its licence conditions. Delays The forum submitted its “urgent” application to Nersa in December 2019, and it took the regulator nine months to respond and engage the municipality for the first time. To add insult to injury, Nersa is seemingly entertaining Emfuleni’s request to allow it to lodge an intergovernmental dispute with Eskom. Intergovernmental processes in this matter have been ongoing since 2015, without any resolution, the forum says. According to the forum Nersa did an audit on Emfuleni in 2014 and pointed out several problems. There has been no improvement since; on the contrary, the situation has deteriorated. The forum says Nersa knows all about Emfuleni’s non-compliance, but “remained almost entirely inactive (and where it was active, entirely ineffectual and dilatory) in the face of the ongoing and escalating crisis”. The forum says Nersa’s belated actions “amount to nothing more than an attempt by Nersa to cover up its complete disregard of its statutory obligations, a misguided effort to rekindle a failed process and to draw the VTSF back into an administrative process that has since become flawed due to Nersa’s inaction”. Turnaround ‘halfway there’ In its response to the VTSF complaint to Nersa, the municipality disputes the lack of progress, saying the turnaround plans have been 53% implemented. It further argues that Eskom itself is battling to keep the country’s lights on and is not in a position to take over distribution in Emfuleni. MC Botha, attorney at Joubert, Galpin Searle, who represents the VTSF, says his clients will have a meeting with Nersa on Thursday and participate in the public hearing, but that the court application proceeds. Parties are currently awaiting a meeting with the deputy judge president about case management and expects to have the case placed on the court roll thereafter.