 SIMON BROWN: I’m chatting now with Vuso Majija, head of retail at Fortress Reit. Vuso, I appreciate your early morning. My tongue-in-cheek intro – is ‘Is bricks and mortar dead?’. The spoiler is, ‘It’s not’. There was a really great online event I attended yesterday. One of the stats that absolutely boggled my brain was that 70% to 75% of retail trade is via a shopping centre, via those malls. Bricks and mortar are not even close to dead. It is the primary way that we consume and shop as a customer. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. VUSO MAJIJA: Good morning, Simon. Thank you for the opportunity. You’re quite right. Our view, or at least my view, is that retail is certainly not dead, and that is correct. That was using 2019 figures. We don’t have the 2020 figures yet, so it’s still very much alive. It’s still the primary method of getting goods and services to customers. But what we are seeing in retail is obviously that there are changes, and those changes were pre-Covid and they carried on during Covid. One of the major changes that we are seeing is a lot of change in the tenant mix because people’s preferences and behaviours are changing. You find that, yes, there was a time where some brands were not doing particularly well, or at least they were giving up space, mainly driven by technology and changing consumer behaviour. If you think about it, some of the big national tenants started requiring less space because they didn’t require as much storage facility or storage space in the shops themselves. So they took less space. Other brands, like the department stores Stuttafords and Edgars, had to relook their trading models. So there were some consultations there. But, at the same time, there were categories really performing well, [that] are still performing well: grocers, pharmacies, and those guys were really taking up space that was being brought onto the market. And that change is carrying on. SIMON BROWN: The point, I suppose, really, is that retail has been evolving and this evolving did not just start before Covid. Retail has been evolving for as long as there has been retail. It will continue to evolve. In some cases, Covid has probably speeded it up, but in a sense … retail is dynamic. It’s not the same one decade to the next. It’s always going to be that shifting process as time marches on, as consumers look for different experiences. VUSO MAJIJA: Yes, 100%. To remain relevant I think it needs to be in a state of evolving constantly. I totally agree with you. SIMON BROWN: And one of the things that really came through – I haven’t been to a mall in a while, although I enjoy them – is that it’s very much an experience. When you think about a mall, you kind of think it’s where you go to the shop. But, truthfully, it’s a lot more than that. It often is an experience, be it just browsing the different shops, maybe also having lunch and everything. And that’s one of the processes which people such as yourself, who have these malls and the like, really need to focus on – that customer experience, getting the product mix right, getting the process, the whole flow, the whole space of the mall [right], making it work so that it actually becomes something to do on a weekend or perhaps an evening. VUSO MAJIJA: Absolutely. I think, Simon, there’s an opportunity for both retailers and vendors to work together to enhance that experience that customers receive. I made a point at the webinar that …customer experience doesn’t start with the salesperson in the shop. It actually starts when someone gets out of their car. It starts with the car guard, it starts with the security. It starts with everyone who is working in that retail environment to create a good experience for customers. And I think that coming out of this pandemic when the vaccine is rolled out, we’re going to see that. People talk about pent-up demand to spend. I think there’s pent-up demand to socialise. So I think that coming out of this, we’ll see more people going to shopping centres. SIMON BROWN: It is a great point. The one thing that I’ve missed most in lockdown is experience. I can check [in] with my friends on Zoom or WhatsApp or something, but it’s not the same. It is that social experience that’s going to be driving it. You make an interesting point here around landlord and tenant. It was made on the webcast yesterday as well, where it’s not one versus the other. I always kind of look at it and think, ah, the tenants just want to pay less, and the landlords just want more rental. But actually, it’s about that relationship and making it work, and truthfully working with each other as much as possible. It’s not just landlords sitting and collecting rentals. VUSO MAJIJA: Absolutely. I think that relationship is mutually beneficial. When retailers do well, landlords do well, and the consumer does well. So that whole ecosystem works together. And I think in the past and presently in South Africa – I don’t know about internationally, but I assume it’s the same – the relationship between landlords and tenants is very strong. SIMON BROWN: Certainly Fortress has a lot more of the regional malls. You’ve one in Jeffreys Bay, for example, and in the smaller towns. I imagine that these retail spaces, these malls, are actually even more important. They are in some senses like what in the olden days would [have been] a town square; you would meet there and like it. These malls become sort of the epicentre of the smaller towns in the regions. VUSO MAJIJA: That’s what we aim for in all our malls. We aim to be the meeting place of the target market. That proves to be good for both the customers and for us. And it is really an important link for service delivery or product delivery to the end customer. And I think, going forward, people talk about online. I think shopping centres are actually going to become even more important. If you think about Checkers’ Sixty60 app, where they’re using the shops themselves as quite a big distribution or the closest point of distribution to their customers … I think we are probably in the future going to see a lot more of that – retailers using their shops to target their closest target markets. Read: Checkers Sixty60 vs Woolies Dash vs PnP Bottles SIMON BROWN: That’s a good point. It’s almost, again, not adversarial between online and the bricks and mortar. You mentioned, for example, Checkers using stores as almost their warehouses for their Sixty60. You’ve got Click and Collect. You’ve got Dark Kitchens – very much a process where online can use the traditional bricks and mortar as part of their broader process. VUSO MAJIJA: Absolutely, absolutely. I think we would obviously lag the international world on online, but what I’ve seen – we have a lot of township shopping centres – is that even there, online is alive and it’s starting to grow. We did, not an extensive study, but we did a study in about June last year on some of our fast-food retailers operating in the townships that offer delivery service, and we found that in that month of June to July last year when people were still coming out of lockdown, their turnovers were close to the previous year’s turnovers, and a big chunk of that came from their deliveries – up to 30%. So that was a bit of a surprise. But it was a good surprise, because the guys were obviously doing well. SIMON BROWN: And, as I said right up front – is bricks and mortar dead? Spoiler – no, it’s not. It’s evolving. It’s always been evolving. Vuso Majija, head of Fortress Reit, I really appreciate your time this morning.