Base metals stormed higher on Monday, with copper rallying above $9 000 a ton on bets that increased demand driven by the recovery from the pandemic will spur a historic deficit, putting the economic bellwether on course for a record run of monthly gains. Nickel topped $20 000 a ton. Copper climbed more than 3% on Monday and is heading for an unprecedented eleventh monthly rise in February. Metals are on tear on expectations that post-crisis demand will outstrip near-term supply. That may both reinforce speculation about about a new commodity supercycle and stoke concern about rising price pressures as the world economy recovers from the pandemic. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership.  The metal’s revival marks a turnaround from earlier in the month, when copper hit turbulence as investors signalled the need for more details about stimulus measures and on concerns about a softening in Chinese demand. But prices rose during China’s Lunar New Year as factory production was more buoyant than usual. Expectations for a revival in inflation have helped, too “Market sentiment is heated right now in anticipation of a new cycle of global inflation,” Jia Zheng, an analyst with Goldtrust Futures Co., said from Shanghai. “Chinese investors returning from Lunar New Year holidays are waiting for more stimulus from the US and Europe. Fundamentally, Chinese demand has exceeded expectations, as travel restrictions boosted consumption.” The risk of faster inflation has prompted a selloff in bonds globally, with the benchmark 10-year US Treasury yield jumping to the highest in about a year on Monday. A gauge derived from bond market pricing signals expectations for average inflation of about 2.2% in the US over the next decade. Goldman’s view Goldman Sachs Group reinforced its bullish copper stance last week, saying that China’s return from the week-long break had triggered another leg higher for prices. The market is facing the largest deficit in a decade this year, with a high risk of scarcity over the coming months, according to the bank. There are already signs of emerging tightness on the London Metal Exchange, as spot contracts trade at a premium to futures. That pattern, known as backwardation, was a feature of the market during a record-breaking boom in Chinese demand last year, and suggests that spot demand is once again outpacing supply as exchange inventories run low. Three-month copper traded at $9 141.50 a ton on the LME at 11:02 a.m. in Singapore after hitting $9 187, the highest since 2011. In China, the SHFE contract hit the daily limit. Other metals rose, with LME nickel hitting $20,010 a ton, and tin at the highest since 2011. Copper’s rally has been a boon for suppliers. Jiangxi Copper, China’s top producer, gained as much as 13% in Hong Kong to the highest level since 2013. In Australia, OZ Minerals has more than doubled over the past 12 months, and shares in BHP Group and Rio Tinto Group rose on Monday. © 2021 Bloomberg