It’s a matter of pure conjecture, but the coming week may well be the moment when investors see the beginning of an end to the largess that helped propel emerging markets to unprecedented highs. Though few expect a sudden turn of events, Russia’s interest-rate decision and the release of Brazilian inflation data could help settle a question that’s burgeoning in the minds of investors. Namely, how will markets in the developing world behave when central bankers tighten the policy screws? Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. “Any sign of a change to tighter policies, for example in China, Brazil or Mexico, could lead to a broader correction of valuations across emerging-market debt,” said Zsolt Papp, a money manager at JPMorgan Asset Management in London. “For now, the expectation is that most emerging-market central banks will maintain accommodative monetary policies.” Developing-nation dollar bonds had their biggest weekly advance this year in the five days through Friday after weaker-than-forecast US jobs data bolstered the case for President Joe Biden’s $1.9 trillion relief package. An index of emerging-market equities clocked up its best week since November. Emerging-market exchange-traded funds, meantime, received an injection of money for a 14th straight week, boosted by another round of strong inflows to J.P. Morgan’s products. The gains were all the more impressive because they came as US Treasury yields climbed to their highest since the early days of the pandemic, signaling a growing concern that the stimulus measures will act as an inflation trigger. A Bloomberg study in January found all developing-world currencies typically sell off when yields jump at a rate greater than about 25 basis points per month. For Lutz Roehmeyer, the chief investment officer at Capitulum Asset Management GmbH in Berlin, an increase in Treasury yields are a welcome indicator of recovery, which is of greater concern to investors. “Rising US yields are a good sign of the economic recovery from the Covid crisis,” he said. “The growth effect for emerging markets should be much more positive than the cost of higher interest rates.” While Brazil’s inflation reading and Russia’s rate decision will be closely followed this week, there’s little pressure for most countries to tighten policy now. Average inflation in the developing economies sat at an all-time low in the fourth quarter. Underscoring investor optimism, a measure of implied volatility for currencies fell on Friday to the lowest since July. An index of expected price swings in equities was at a seven-week low.