The reflation trade driving a sell-off in Treasuries will have investors watching to see if this results in a spike in emerging-market yields. The pace of any such yield surge carries far more weight for developing-nation bonds than the levels reached. Bonds from Indonesia, Mexico and Malaysia are the most vulnerable to sudden surges, because they historically have fiscal and/or current-account deficits, or both, according to a Bloomberg study of 15 emerging markets. In contrast, sovereign securities from South Korea, the Czech Republic, Poland and Thailand — all of which have open capital accounts and a relatively high dependence on trade — were found to be the most sensitive to a gradual move higher in US rates. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. U.S. 10-year yields U.S. 10-year yields Note: Consistency refers to the z-score, or ratio of average moves against the standard deviation of all moves while size refers to average move versus 1 basis point move in US Treasuries Ten-year Treasury yields soared to an over 10-month high of 1.19% on Monday, rising for an eighth day as Friday’s disappointing jobs data bolstered calls for more stimulus. Inflationary expectations have sent 10-year US breakevens to an 8-year high, aided also by robust corporate earnings. For further signs of price growth, investors will be eying the release of the US personal consumption expenditures data on Wednesday, which is the Federal Reserve’s preferred inflation targeting gauge. Note: Marcus Wong is an EM macro strategist, who writes for Bloomberg. The observations he makes are his own and not intended as investment advice