Stocks traded with little fanfare Friday as holidays across Asia curbed trading, and US and European equity futures were little changed. Crude oil extended an overnight retreat. Japanese shares ticked higher and Australian stocks slipped amid a snap lockdown for Victoria state. S&P 500 futures dipped after the benchmark on Thursday eked out a gain to close at an all-time high. Strength in tech shares ensured the Nasdaq 100 outperformed. Applications for US state unemployment benefits fell slightly last week in a sign that the labor market is still gradually improving. The dollar firmed against most G-10 peers and Treasuries edged up. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Crude oil pared its weekly advance following the International Energy Agency’s bleaker outlook for global demand. Walt Disney Co. climbed post market after strong growth in its streaming services. Bitcoin climbed to a record.  After a sharp run-up in global equities to a record high this year and signs central banks will keep supportive monetary policy in place, a debate is rumbling over whether more stimulus along with the vaccine distribution will cause inflation to overheat. “My big concern is that we get the mother of all melt ups and we get to those levels earlier and that generates a material risk of a melt down in the autumn,” James Bevan, chief investment officer at CCLA Investment Management Ltd. said on Bloomberg TV. On the virus front, the Australian state of Victoria will shutdown for five days due to concerns around the spread of a Covid-19 variant. President Joe Biden announced the US has finished deals for 100 million additional vaccine doses each from Pfizer Inc. and Moderna Inc. Here are the main moves in markets: