Asian stocks and US equity futures edged higher Tuesday as investors assessed the market outlook after a jump in bond yields and commodity prices amid expectations of faster economic growth. Hong Kong stocks outperformed, while Japan was shut for a holiday. S&P 500 contracts climbed and European futures dipped after the US index fell a fifth day. The Nasdaq 100 tumbled more than 2% on Monday as investors questioned the appeal of costlier equities after the climb in long-term borrowing costs. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Treasuries were steady after the gap between 5- and 30-year yields touched the highest level in more than six years. Oil rose toward $63 a barrel with investment banks and traders predicting the market will tighten further.  The stock market’s rally from the depths of the pandemic almost a year ago is under scrutiny as bond yields rise. One concern is that broad benchmarks have already priced in much of the prospective global recovery spurred by vaccines and US stimulus. Another is that central banks may eventually start reconsidering emergency programs that have supported global markets. “The timing of a pullback is even more uncertain than we previously understood,” said Lori Calvasina, head of US equity strategy at RBC Capital Markets. “One has the potential to start at any time, but may not emerge until the second half given a lack of near-term catalysts. We don’t view the recent rise in 10-year yields as a reason to turn negative on US equities for the year.” Traders are waiting to hear from Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell when he testifies to the Senate Banking Committee on Tuesday and the House Financial Services panel the following day. He’s expected to play down the risk of inflation despite the size of President Joe Biden’s $1.9 trillion coronavirus relief proposal. Elsewhere, Bitcoin retreated below $50 000 after a bout of volatility highlighted lingering doubts about the durability of the token’s mesmerising rally. Some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: