Despite reporting a 12.1% increase in revenue from continuing operations for the quarter ended December 31, 2020, listed fast-moving consumer goods giant Tiger Brands says the “strong start” to its financial year has been “diluted by a particularly poor performance for the month of January 2021”. The group, which owns brands such as Tiger Oats, Albany Bread and Tastic Rice, put out a voluntary trading update (for the four months to the end of January) and a trading statement for its upcoming half-year ending March 31 on Wednesday. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. In its Sens statement, Tiger Brands notes that the poor performance in January led to a reduction in overall revenue growth for the four months to end-January, which came in at 9.4%. Price inflation The double-digit revenue growth to the end of December was “underpinned” by overall price inflation of 9% and volume growth of just 2.6%. However, revenue growth to the end of January was “driven mainly by price inflation”. “It is too early to conclude whether the lower consumer demand levels evident in the month of January reflect an even more challenging environment than what was experienced over the past year,” Tiger Brands says. “However, the company remains confident that the initiatives in place will deliver the improvements anticipated in the trading statement.” The group is exiting its Deciduous Fruit business and has exited its Value-Added Meat Products (Vamp) business (essentially the Enterprise Foods subsidiary), which was rocked by the listeriosis outbreak a few years ago. Read: Tiger Brands to sell processed meats units for R428m Its Vamp business is now regarded as a discontinued operation after it was sold in October last year. Earnings The group notes in its trading statement that it expects headline earnings per share (Heps) from continuing operations for the six months to March 31 to be between 10% and 20% higher. This would translate to Heps being between 59 cents and 120 cents higher than the 611 cents reported in the corresponding period last year. Read: Tiger Brands sees a 20% recovery in six-month profit Heps from total operations (including he discontinued Vamp business) for the half year is expected to be between 35% and 45% (or 169 cents and 218 cents) higher than the 489 cents reported in the same period last year. “The significant increase expected in Heps from total operations … is primarily due to the fact that the first six months of last year included significant losses recorded by the company’s Vamp business,” it says. “Whilst not immune to the tragic consequences of Covid-19, the group’s robust health and safety protocols currently in place appear to have had a positive impact. “Although there were no major disruptions to business continuity, some businesses were impacted by inbound supply disruptions. Preventative costs directly attributable to Covid-19 amounted to approximately R26 million for the four months to 31 January 2021.” Tiger Brands says that as a precautionary measure, contingency plans have been put in place to mitigate the potential disruption to its internal and external supply chains in the event of an anticipated Covid-19 third wave. The group’s half-year results are expected to be released around May 20.