Global bond markets attempted to recover from an aggressive selloff that drove steep losses in Treasuries and US stocks Thursday. The dollar extended overnight gains. Shares in Europe dropped, with the Stoxx Europe 600 index heading for its biggest plunge since January. Futures on the Nasdaq 100 pointed to further declines after the gauge fell 3.6% as bets on a cyclical rotation hammer tech stocks. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The 10-year Treasury yield fell back below 1.5% after trading as high as 1.6% Thursday, when a poorly received government auction led to forced selling by holders of mortgage securities. Yields on core European bonds also ticked lower, while Japan’s benchmark hovered near its highest level since early 2016.  Investors are getting increasingly worried that accelerating inflation could trigger a pullback in monetary policy support that has fueled gains in risk assets amid the pandemic. Federal Reserve officials so far say surging Treasury yields reflect optimism and have stressed that the central bank has no plans to tighten policy prematurely. “A move of this magnitude is not healthy for markets and equities are rightfully acting negatively to it,” said Matthew Miskin, the co-chief investment strategist at John Hancock Investment Management. “We will be watching to see if the Fed pushes back more meaningfully on the recent rise in yields.” A gauge of shares in the Asia-Pacific region fell the most since the virus-induced selloff in March as benchmarks dropped more than 3% in Japan and Hong Kong. Elsewhere, oil retreated from its the highest in more than a year as traders mulled depleting global inventories. Bitcoin tumbled more than 7% and gold extended an overnight decline. Some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: