Telkom’s mobile business is still flying. In a financial update for the nine months to end-December 2020, published on Monday, the company said service revenue from mobile soared 40.7% year on year. This helped ensure that group revenue rose, albeit only just at 0.9% to R32.4-billion. Dragging down the results was a shocking 26.2% decline in year-to-date fixed voice and interconnection revenue. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Ebitda, a measure of operational profitability, climbed by 8.5% year on year to R8.6-billion thanks to “sustainable cost management” measures. Capital expenditure was down from R5.5-billion to R5.1-billion, although there was an acceleration in the third quarter of the financial year. Despite this, Telkom liquidity remained “healthy”, with a “stable balance sheet”. In the first nine months, Telkom generated free cash flow of R1.6-billion, up from R211-million reported in the first half of the 2021 financial year. Excluding the year-to-date costs associated with retrenchments and early retirement packages amounting to almost R1.3-billion, Telkom generated free cash flow, year to date, of R2.8-billion. “The group delivered a solid set of results where growth was challenging due to Covid-19 and the strained South African economy. This was driven by robust mobile growth, solid sustainable cost management and strong free cash flow generation,” Telkom CEO Sipho Maseko said in a statement. “Telkom’s broadband-led strategy and the decision to invest in infrastructure ahead of demand enabled us to meet the surge in demand for broadband services,” he said. “These results also reflect the success of our financial strategic objectives, which include building financial resilience through sustainable cost management, cash preservation and disciplined capital allocation as we weather the impact of Covid-19 in our businesses.” On its mobile performance specifically, Telkom said: Meanwhile, BCX’s performance remains under pressure with the overall market environment “challenging”, albeit with some economic recovery with year-to-date revenue down 9% to R11.9-billion. “The year-to-date decline in revenue is lower than the revenue decline reported in the first half of the year as we saw a slight recovery in the South African economy in the third quarter,” Telkom said. Openserve, Telkom’s wholesale division, remains under pressure, with year-to-date revenue down 12% to R10.2-billion. “While we saw an increased need for data in the period, fixed voice usage continued to decline…” Investment in the network allowed Openserve to carry increased traffic of 28% across its fixed-line network. “We saw an increase in demand for fixed connectivity resulting in an improved fibre-to-the-home connectivity to 56.7%, compared to 46.6% in the prior period.” — © 2021 NewsCentral Media This article was published with the permission of TechCentral, the original publication can be viewed here.