Global stocks pushed forward on an eight-day winning streak on the heels of positive corporate news, improving virus trends and US stimulus plans. The MSCI World Index gained 0.2%, the longest advance since November. French investment bank Natixis SA surged 8% after financial group BPCE SA offered to buy out minority shareholders. Tencent Holdings Ltd. drove strong gains in Asia as the company won Chinese regulatory approval to roll out a blockbuster game. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Outside of equities, the moves were more muted. Oil prices ticked higher. The dollar was steady ahead of a report on US consumer prices due later on Wednesday. While the reading is expected to be tepid, inflation has quickly become the biggest issue in markets on speculation the Federal Reserve will let the US economy run hot out of the pandemic.  “This buy-everything stock rally is defying reality, but the fear of missing out keeps pushing prices higher,” said Peter Rosenstreich, head of market strategy at Swissquote. “The real worry I have is the lack of real issues that would halt the optimism.” Across markets, the theme continues to be the reflation trade — the bet that Covid-19 vaccines will restore economic growth and fuel gains in everything from stocks to crude oil. Daniel Tenengauzer, head of markets strategy at Bank of New York Mellon Corp., has warned that if inflation gets hotter than the Fed’s is aiming for, it may force the central bank to adopt a tool to cap long-term yields, known as yield-curve control. Yields on the 30-year Treasury are holding just below 2% after crossing that threshold earlier this week. Elsewhere in markets, platinum rallied to a six-year high on expectations it will benefit from tight supplies and investment demand. Bitcoin fluctuated around $46 000. Here are some key events coming up: These are the main moves in markets: