Preference shares are an underappreciated asset class, particularly for income-seeking private investors who are less constrained than institutions when it comes to liquidity. But first, what are preference shares? Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Preference shares are shares with special rights attaching to them. Each preference share is unique but most have the following characteristics: Preference shares are like bonds in the way that any profits over their required dividend does not accrue to them but goes to ordinary shareholders. That said – and contrary to most bonds – preference shares typically have floating rates and, thus, the Reserve Bank announcing a rate cut or hike should not, per se, see a concomitant movement in the preference share prices. Fixed-rate bonds, though, would see their market prices move depending on interest rate movements. Why would a preference share not necessarily move on a change in South Africa’s repo rate? If a bond is paying R10 interest a year, then the repo rate moving from 10% to 5% should see the bond’s market price double. E.g. R100 (=R10/10%) fair value of the bond moves to R200 (=R10/5%). A preference share in the same example would simply see its dividend change as the interest rates change; thus, its market price would (theoretically) remain stable. What does a preference share’s price reflect? The short answer is credit risk. The higher the credit risk, the higher the preference share’s yield in the market, and vice versa. (The long answer includes rising marginal value at lower interest rates, the liquidity of the actual instruments in the market and/or future expectations regarding macro events and our rates cycle.) If we shift our view to our JSE-listed preference shares, you will see a lot of our banks have issued them. Given that our banks are both well-capitalised and are basically ‘underwritten’ by the Reserve Bank, this is a great thing as it means that these preference shares offer relatively lower credit risk than most listed companies. Adjusting for the current prime rate of 7% to calculate the different preference shares’ forward dividend yields, we get the following spread across the JSE: JSE-listed preference shares (cps) (R/share) % of prime Source: Various market sources and own workings and assumptions, ignoring Steinhoff, Nampak and Northam preference shares. Relative to a cash account’s measly 0.5~3% per annum return, achieving an 8~10% yield on a relatively safe investment is attractive. Even after we take out dividend withholding tax of 20%, this remains equal-to-higher than the most domestic yielding investments of equivalent safety. So which preference share should you invest in? There is a preference share exchange-traded fund (ETF) – CoreShares PrefTrax – but its high total expense ratio (0.45% pa) and other costs (e.g. spread) see it yielding a less attractive c.7.5% (forward yield at current prime rate). Particularly given the huge weighting of the banking preference shares in this ETF, why not just buy a hand-selected basket of the preference shares directly in the market? As demonstrated below, this should arrive at a more attractive yield (c.8.5% or +13% higher than the PrefTrax) without an added layer of costs between you and the underlying investment. Hand-selected basket of JSE-listed preference shares Source: Various market sources and own workings and assumptions. Particularly in a world with low-to-negative rates and collapsing yields, preference shares offer the private investors a potentially attractive, relatively safe and often underappreciate option that should be considered by those seeking income. Keith McLachlan is a small cap analyst.