Stocks fell with US and European equity futures Wednesday as investors balanced the risk of stronger inflation driving global rates higher against the Federal Reserve’s pledge of continued policy support. A gauge of Asian shares slid the most in almost a month, with Hong Kong equities tumbling on the city’s plan to raise stamp duty on stock trading for the first time since 1993. Chinese gauges retreated for a third day. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The S&P 500 Index reversed losses Tuesday to close in the green following Fed Chair Jerome Powell’s message that the central bank was nowhere close to unwinding its easy policy. Cyclicals outperformed, while the tech heavy Nasdaq 100 closed lower despite a late rally. Ten-year Treasury yields held just below the one-year high reached Monday. The dollar dipped. The New Zealand dollar advanced even as the central bank said “prolonged” stimulus was needed. Oil declined after an industry report pointed to the first gain in US crude stockpiles in five weeks.  Powell voiced cautious expectations for a return to more-normal activity later this year and said that higher bond yields reflected economic optimism, not inflation fears. While that helped assuage some investors betting on a global recovery spurred by vaccines and fiscal aid, there are also lingering concerns that stock valuations are stretched. “The market — while applauding impending fiscal largesse, stronger economic growth, and a markedly more positive earnings outlook — can’t help but wonder whether inflationary pressures will remain ‘transient,’ to use Fed Chairman Jerome Powell’s favorite word,” said Quincy Krosby, chief market strategist at Prudential Financial. A vote on President Joe Biden’s $1.9 trillion Covid-19 relief bill is due to be held in the House of Representatives on Friday. Money-market traders have pulled forward their rate-hike expectations since the start of this year, and now see the Fed raising interest rates a quarter point by the middle of 2023. Commodities stabilised after their recent run-up, with the Bloomberg Commodity Spot Index just shy of its highest level since 2013. Elsewhere, Bitcoin rallied and hovered around $50 000 after a bout of volatility highlighted lingering doubts about the durability of the token’s gains. Some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: