The global equity rally took a breather in Tuesday as investors mulled stimulus prospects and the impact of rising inflation expectations with stocks at record highs. The dollar declined. Stocks were little changed in Japan and Hong Kong, and retreated in South Korea and Australia. US and European futures dipped. Chinese shares gained ahead of the Lunar New Year Holiday. Earlier, US shares closed higher for a sixth straight session with the S&P 500 at a record, spurred by fresh signs the Biden administration is committed to passing a sizable aid bill to address unemployment. Treasuries advanced. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Commodities prices pointed to renewed optimism in the global economic recovery. Brent oil extended an advance above $60 a barrel on signs the global market is tightening and demand is improving. Bitcoin jumped to a record after Tesla Inc. bought $1.5 billion of the cryptocurrency. Asian cryptocurrency shares surged. The average yield on US junk bonds dropped below 4% for the first time ever on Monday.  Investors are taking comfort from vaccine rollouts and signs of progress on stimulus, though worries remain about stretched valuations. With inflation expectations near the highest since 2013, questions have also begun to be raised about when the so-called reflation trade in bonds could start to threaten equities. “We are getting to the point where we have to start worrying about the risk of how do we pull back on that stimulus, will it cause the economy to overheat, are these valuations becoming too expensive,” Saira Malik, Nuveen head of global equities, said on Bloomberg TV. “That is something we are going to be grappling with as the year goes on.” Here are some key events coming up: These are the main moves in markets