Moneyweb – a top destination for business, finance and investment news in South Africa – is looking to appoint a senior financial services writer to join its team. The position is senior level and the individual will be reporting to the publication’s editors. Position overview Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. We’re looking for a person with a track record of excellent business and investment writing and analysis. The candidate must have a good grasp of the South African business environment, and its global context. They need to have an understanding of the principles of economics and the relationships between different financial instruments, knowledge of JSE-listed stocks, and be able to interpret companies’ financial statements. They must know what makes a good story, have an ear for news, an excellent work ethic and be able to generate great story ideas in discussion with the editorial team. Main responsibilities Minimum qualifications and requirements The salary is negotiable and the journalist should preferably have their own transport. How to apply Applicants must send a CV and cover letter (no more than 500 words) outlining how they meet the specific requirements of the position and what they can add to Moneyweb, to editor@moneyweb.co.za. Closing date for applications: March 5, 2021. Subject reference: Financial journalist Moneyweb is an equal opportunity employer. The appointment will be made in line with Moneyweb’s Employment Equity Plan and Policy. South Africans get preference. Applicants not contacted within 14 days after the closing date should consider their applications unsuccessful.