The stock rally paused Thursday and US and European equity futures were steady as investors weighed the implications of weaker than expected American inflation data for the reflation trade that bets on a recovery from the pandemic. S&P 500 contracts ticked higher after the index ended virtually flat near a record high. The 10-year Treasury yield fell back below 1.15% after US core consumer prices signaled scant inflation. Asian stocks posted modest gains amid low volumes, with Chinese, Japanese and South Korean markets closed. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Hong Kong equities shrugged off a report that Chinese authorities had detained a Tencent executive. The dollar added to losses and crude oil dropped after a spell of gains.  The CPI data are part of a debate in financial markets over the course of inflation. Despite the muted January figure, some investors continue to expect intensifying price pressures in the months ahead as President Joe Biden pushes for major stimulus and more vaccinations allow virus-related restrictions to be eased, spurring consumer spending. “While inflation is not showing up in the data right now, inflation is on its way thanks to fiscal and monetary stimulus and pent-up consumer demand that should intensify as the economy reopens,” Nancy Davis, founder of Quadratic Capital Management, said in a note. In a speech Wednesday, Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell said the US job market remains a long way from a full recovery and called on both lawmakers and the private sector to support workers. He also said it will require more than supportive monetary policy to achieve and sustain maximum employment. The two-year US Treasury yield touched an all-time low, underscoring the loose policy conditions in place to counter the impact of the pandemic. Meanwhile, Biden — in his first conversation as president with the Chinese leader Xi Jinping — spoke of his concern about China’s “coercive and unfair economic practices” as well as human rights abuses in the Xinjiang region, according to a White House account of their telephone call. On the virus front, a World Health Organisation panel recommended AstraZeneca Plc’s vaccine for all adults over 18, paving the way to speed up inoculations in developing nations. The daily number of new coronavirus cases in the US was under 100 000 for a third consecutive day, the first time that’s happened since the week of November 2. Here are some key events coming up: These are the main moves in markets: