Bonds deepened a selloff and metals rallied, with copper vaulting above $9 000 a ton, as investors priced in bets for inflation and economic growth. Technology shares led losses in equities. A key part of the Treasuries curve — the gap between 5- and 30-year yields — touched the highest level in more than five years. Bond yields from Australia, the UK and Spain climbed, underscoring the challenge facing central banks that have fought to keep borrowing costs low. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. In equities, the futures on the Nasdaq 100 slid 1.4% and European markets were lower. While the reflation trade has been a bullish catalyst for stocks this year, that reasoning seemed to be coming under question on Monday. On the minds of equity investors are worries about peak valuations, the effect of rising bond yields and when stimulus programs will end. Meanwhile, commodity prices were almost uniformly green on Monday. Brent oil climbed above $63 a barrel as Goldman Sachs Group Inc. predicted prices could advance into the $70s in coming months. Shares of Jiangxi Copper Co., China’s top producer, gained 15% in Hong Kong.  “We are still in a risk-on environment,” Adrian Zuercher, head of global asset allocation at UBS Wealth Management, said on Bloomberg TV. “Everybody is playing out the outlook for better economic growth, the outlook for more fiscal stimulus. It’s normal that nominal yields are trending higher.” Elsewhere, Boeing Co. shares dropped 4% in US premarket trading after airlines halted flights using the company’s 777 aircraft following an explosive engine failure. Bitcoin slumped 5% as prices pulled back from an all-time high. In Australia, the central bank resumed purchases of three-year securities to defend its yield target. Ten-year yields in both Australia and New Zealand surged more than 10 basis points. Some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: