Stocks climbed Friday with US and European futures, following Wall Street higher on signs of a healing labour market and improving coronavirus trends. Treasuries were steady after a widely watched segment of the yield curve steepened to levels last seen in 2015. Japan and South Korea were among markets leading Asian gains. S&P 500 futures ticked higher after the benchmark closed up more than 1% at a record, led by banks and tech shares, while the Russell 2000 Index of smaller companies climbed 2%. Earnings remained in focus with EBay Inc. and PayPal Holdings Inc. surging on upbeat forecasts. The dollar held an overnight gain. Crude oil advanced and gold steadied after Thursday’s decline. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. In Hong Kong, short-video startup Kuaishou Technology surged more than 190% on its debut after one of the city’s biggest initial-public offerings in years.  Global equities are flirting with all-time highs as corporate profits rebound and central banks remain supportive amid the pandemic. US. President Joe Biden’s push to fast-track a $1.9 trillion stimulus package has also boosted sentiment. A report Thursday showed US jobless claims fell to the lowest since November, and investor focus now turns to payroll data Friday. “The economic data is coming in very strong,” Andrew Slimmon, fund manager at Morgan Stanley Investment Management, said on Bloomberg TV. “The market is going to struggle at some point this year, but at the moment it’s too early because the numbers are still coming through.” On the virus front, restrictions are lifting around the US as the outbreak eases. The Bank of England forecast that the UK economy is heading for a powerful rebound thanks to an aggressive push to vaccinate citizens. France said a new lockdown is not justified at the moment. Elsewhere, Robinhood Markets Inc. removed limits on buying shares of GameStop Corp. and AMC Entertainment Holdings Inc. — stocks at the center of the battle between Reddit-empowered retail traders and short-sellers. There are the main moves in markets: