South Africa’s main stock index extended its gains, spurred by Finance Minister Tito Mboweni’s budget address, climbing as much as 1.6% as banks rallied on a speech that Deutsche Bank AG described as “hitting all the right notes.” The benchmark gauge posted its strongest advance for a month, with Standard Bank climbing 2.7% and fellow lender FirstRand rising 1.7% to be among the strongest drivers of the gains. So-called South Africa Inc. stocks focused on the domestic economy such as retailers also climbed as the rand strengthened. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. “This should be positive for the rand and markets — better-than-consensus deficit trajectory, thanks to an increase in tax collections of some R99 billion in FY20/21,” Johannesburg-based Deutsche Bank economist Danelee Masia wrote in a note. “The budget has been a welcomed surprise, and a positive deviation from previous years’ negative surprises.” FTSE/JSE Africa All-Share Index was 1.2% higher as of 3:36 p.m. in Johannesburg, with 101 out of the 141 members of the gauge higher. An index of banking stocks was 2.5% higher, after rising as much as 3.3%. Capitec rose 1.8%, Absa gained 4.7%, Nedbank rose 4.4% and Investec Plc 3.1% Insurers climbed 3.1%, also boosted by the stronger local currency. General retailers gained 3.2%, while food and drug retailers were up 1.4%. The gauge of mining stocks climbed 1.7%, as diversified miners joined gold and platinum producers in rising. Platinum miners resumed their rally, climbing 1% as prices increased. A gauge of gold miners climbed 1.1%.