Most Asian stocks rose along with US and European futures Wednesday, extending a global rally as earnings roll in, optimism builds over US stimulus and concern about volatile retail trading eases. The dollar dipped. Shares outperformed in South Korea and Japan. S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100 futures climbed after Alphabet Inc. and Amazon.com Inc. reported better-than-estimated revenue. US stocks earlier closed higher for a second session. Treasury yields edged up amid a move to fast track a US stimulus plan. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Elsewhere, oil traded at its highest in over a year on tightening global supplies. Chinese equities fluctuated after the People’s Bank of China drained some funds from the financial system.  Investors have returned to buying shares as the speculative trades popular with Reddit crowds crumble, easing fears that they could lead to destabilising swings in the stock market. GameStop Corp. and AMC Entertainment Holdings Inc. tumbled Tuesday, while silver steadied Wednesday after a 10% slide from an eight-year high. Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen has summoned US financial regulators to discuss the recent market volatility. Meanwhile, Senate Democrats Tuesday put President Joe Biden’s $1.9 trillion Covid-19 relief plan on a fast track to passage, increasing the likelihood it eventually passes on a party-line vote. “The fact that markets have cooled down a bit with the retail-trading frenzy, that’s giving a little bit of optimism,” said Megan Horneman, director of portfolio strategy at Verdence Capital Advisors. “Anytime there’s more stability to markets, there’s a breath of relief of all investors.” Still, some urged caution. Bank of America Corp. strategists came out with a warning about rising bullishness, saying that a sentiment indicator is close to hitting a “sell” signal. These are some key events coming up: These are the main moves in markets: