The Financial Sector Conduct Authority (FSCA) issued a “health warning” on crypto assets on Thursday, after receiving a large number complaints from South Africans who have lost their savings through crypto-related investments. Crypto-related investments are not regulated by the FSCA, though draft proposals for regulation were issued last year which would bring cryptos under the Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services (Fais) Act. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read: Crypto intermediaries must now be licensed FSPs “As a result, if something goes wrong, you’re unlikely to get your money back and will have no recourse against anyone,” says the FSCA statement. Crypto-assets – also called cryptocurrencies – are digital representations of value that are not issued by a central bank. The FSCA warns of the following risks: Investing in crypto assets, or investments and lending linked to them is high risk and those who participate should be prepared to lose all their money; Regardless of their risk appetites, the FSCA urges investors to allocate only a small percentage of their portfolios to cryptos. Scam alert It then issued the following scam alert: Read:
Finalmente Global placed in final liquidation as MTI dominoes start falling
MTI: Provisional liquidators appointed The FSCA says it is working with the Intergovernmental Fintech Working Group (IFWG) to better understand and regulate “where appropriate”, crypto assets in SA. It also advises retirement fund trustees to remain vigilant in their fiduciary duties before allowing investment managers to expose their fund assets to cryptos. “The FSCA currently discourages such investments by retirement funds until regulation has been finalised to safeguard investors,” says the statement.