South Africa’s rand firmed early on Monday, hurdling the key technical level of R14.50 on its way to a one-year best as signs of a local economic rebound and continued stimulus in the United States lifted demand for the currency. At 0700 GMT, the rand was 0.5% firmer at R14.47 per dollar, a touch off the session best of R14.46 which is its strongest since January 2020. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Crucially, it was the first time since early January the unit broke below the R14.50 technical resistance mark seen as a buy-target by traders. “The Rand’s path through least resistance has been a much-discussed topic over the past few months with flows by exporters dominating and international investors stuck with piles of free money, which needs to find a high-yielding home,” said Standard Bank’s chief trader Warrick Butler. “This is not going to change until we either get a diabolical budget from Mboweni (unlikely) or there is a global black swan event which throws us a curve ball.” Last week, South Africa recorded a better-than-expected expansion in industrial production, up 1.8% in December, while mining output also inched up, suggesting faster economic momentum in 2021 following the coronavirus-induced contraction in 2020. Finance Minister Tito Mboweni is set to deliver the 2021 budget on February 24, showing better-than-forecast revenue collection. South African assets often rally in the weeks ahead of the budget, falling thereafter, according to analysts. The rand is up around 1% year-to-date against the dollar. Bonds were flat, with the yield on benchmark 10-year government issue steady at 8.520%