South African Airways (SAA) has received a further R5 billion from the Department of Public Enterprises to help make severance payments to laid-off staff as part of its rescue plan, administrators of the plan said on Tuesday. SAA entered business rescue in December 2019 after roughly a decade of financial losses, with its fortunes worsening after the Covid-19 pandemic grounded flights. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The government committed to providing R10.5 billion to bailout the airline in October’s mid-term budget. The business rescue practitioners (BRP) hired to restructure the airline said they had received R7.8 billion from the government including the latest payment. The administrators, who have proposed a plan which includes reducing the airline’s staff by around two-thirds, said the money allowed them to pay cabin crew and ground staff that had accepted voluntary severance packages in August. More than 3,000 SAA employees have accepted severance packages, while 1,300 are still in negotiations, the administrators said. “The payment (to staff) follows the receipt of a further tranche of R5 billion from the Department of Public Enterprises on 12 February, which has further allowed the BRPs to confirm the second payment on 19 February.” Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan told Bloomberg TV on Friday that South Africa had identified three equity partners for SAA and would decide on which to pick in the next month or so. Read:
SAA: Numsa and Sacca backpay application dismissed
SAA pilots did not run the airline into the ground – Saapa