South Africa’s highest court, the Constitutional Court, handed down a significant judgment on February 4 declaring that certain provisions of the infamous Regulation of Interception of Communications Act (Rica) are unconstitutional. In this ground-breaking judgment, the Constitutional Court holds that certain provisions of Rica are unconstitutional in so far as Rica fails to provide appropriate safeguards and adequately prescribe procedures in many respects when it comes to undertaking surveillance. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The case was brought about by the amaBhugane Centre for Investigative Journalism having approached the Constitutional Court for confirmation of the declaration of unconstitutionality in the 2017 High Court decision. Where the act fails To this end, the Constitutional Court noted that various provisions of Rica are inadequate and thus unconstitutional in so far as they: The Constitutional Court ordered that such an order for the declaration of unconstitutionality is to take effect immediately and is suspended for a period of 36 months in order to afford parliament an opportunity to cure the defect causing the invalidity. During this period of suspension, however, the Constitutional Court has read in certain provisions giving effect to the gaps contained in Rica as it currently stands. In a democratic society founded on the democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom, it is vital to ensure that persons be free from intrusions and interference by the State in one’s personal life, and this decision by the Constitutional Court goes a long way to enforce this. Read: The South African government’s thinking on surveillance law is regressive Rui Lopes is managing director and Kirsty Gibson an associate designate at Lopes Attorneys.