Asian stocks advanced Tuesday after their US counterparts notched further all-time highs as investors awaited second-quarter earnings season. Treasury yields were steady after a solid US debt sale. An MSCI gauge of the region’s stocks rose for a second day. Hong Kong outperformed as Chinese technology shares climbed after government approval of a Tencent Holdings deal eased concerns about stricter regulation. Shares in Taiwan touched an intraday record high. US futures fluctuated after the S&P 500 and tech-heavy Nasdaq 100 closed at new highs. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Investors are also focusing on the US inflation report and Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell’s testimony this week as policy makers prepare to discuss tapering stimulus as the economy recovers from the pandemic. The US Treasury sold $58 billion of three-year notes at yields slightly higher than before the auction. A sale of $38 billion of 10-year notes was greeted by stronger demand. The dollar dipped against most major peers.  Expectations for a solid earnings season are underpinning the stock rally, as investors ponder how central banks will unwind the support driving the recovery from the pandemic. Still, inflationary pressures remain a concern, as does the spread of the delta variant and a slowdown in vaccination rates. “Our medium-term outlook remains supported by strong growth and fundamentals: vaccination, fiscal stimulus, monetary support, and very strong earnings,” Esty Dwek, head of global market strategy at Natixis Investment Managers Solutions, said in a note. “However, the second half could prove bumpier as we these tailwinds could start to fade.” In the Philippines, the peso and stocks declined, and bond spreads widened after Fitch Ratings changed the sovereign credit outlook to negative from stable. Elsewhere, oil rose for the third time in four days as traders grappled with the demand implications of a Covid-19 resurgence in several regions and slowing economic growth in China. Here are some events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in financial markets: