Ethekwini, the South African municipality that includes the port city of Durban, has become the first in the country to seek proposals for private power generation. The municipality on Friday released a request for information for the supply of 400 megawatts of power in a bid to ease reliance on national utility Eskom Holdings, which has subjected the country to intermittent power outages for more than a decade. It will also allow the city of 3.8 million people, which houses Africa’s largest port, to get more of its energy from renewable sources as Eskom relies almost entirely on coal. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read: Move to becoming a ‘market’ based energy sector welcomed Is this Ramaphosa’s most decisive economic decision since taking office? Ethekwini is seeking a “diverse mix of sustainable, dispatchable and reliable power generation technologies,” the municipality said on its website, indicating that while it isn’t stipulating which technology should be proposed it does want the power to be available on demand. The request follows the decision by the South African government last year to allow cities to buy power from providers other than Eskom. Johannesburg and Cape Town have similar plans. The City of Johannesburg will issue a request for information for the construction of a 150-megawatt solar plant, 50 megawatts of rooftop solar panels and the refurbishment of an idle gas-fired plant that could generate 20 megawatts in September, the municipality said in a presentation early last month. It will also seek information for the installation of 100 megawatts of battery storage. © 2021 Bloomberg