JSE-listed gaming and hospitality group Sun International announced on Monday that it has appointed Sam Sithole as its new non-executive chairman. Sithole’s appointment became effective on Friday, July 2. He replaces Jabu Mabuza who recently passed away suddenly from Covid-19. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read: Covid claims the life of Jabu Mabuza Bidding farewell to one of business’s giants Sun International said Sithole brings a wealth of experience to the role, having been a member of its board since 2018, in addition to his other corporate roles. Sithole is CEO and co-founder of Value Capital Partners which has a substantial shareholding in the Sun International group. Commenting on the appointment, Sun International CEO Anthony Leeming said: “Sam Sithole’s history with the company has given him valuable knowledge and insight, and his more than 20 years of experience in finance and investment will serve us well. The board and management of Sun International congratulate Sam on his new appointment and welcome him as chairman.” Sithole is also a director of several JSE-listed companies including technology giant Altron, workplace solutions provider Adcorp and Metair Investments. A chartered accountant by training and an experienced investment executive, Sithole was previously at Brait for more than eight years in different roles, including the group’s financial director. Prior to Brait, he was a Deloitte partner, where he spent six years as an audit partner and departed the firm as group leader for the financial services audit practice in Johannesburg.