Crypto arbitrage may seem like easy money with little risk – you are buying cryptos cheaply overseas and selling them at a higher price in SA. “Crypto arbitrage has become popular with people looking for relatively low-risk profits, but there are risks, and there are downsides to this type of trade,” says Coindirect head of trading, Chris Harmse. “The first thing people have to understand is this is not a get-rich-quick scheme. Yes, there are times when it is possible to make a 5% or even 8% profit on a single trade, but for the most part the arbitrage premium has narrowed to 1.5% to 3% and, as we saw in recent weeks, the premium disappeared altogether at times. This is to be expected as more people have entered the market, but we also know from history that the arbitrage premium returns to a more normal 1% to 3% over time. Make no mistake, this is still an attractive and profitable activity.” Harmse says it is crucial for those venturing down the road of crypto arbitrage to understand some of the pitfalls and risks. “Despite the downside, there are thousands of South Africans who have recognised the profit opportunities from crypto arbitrage,” says Harmse. “We’ve made this an attractive proposition by optimising our processes to complete two arbitrage trades in a day. This is one way to maximise profit returns on days when the arbitrage premium is wider than on others. The beauty of this trade is that you get to see your capital plus profits in your account on the same day – or even twice on the same day if two trades are completed.” Costs Clients need a minimum of R100 000 to take advantage of the service, and Coindirect charges 1% of the capital on each arbitrage trade. That does not include the R500 Swift fee plus 0.35% for forex handling, totaling 1.85%. About Coindirect In addition to its arbitrage service, it provides a platform for its 321 000 users to buy and sell more than 40 cryptocurrencies, and provides a cross-border payment service with same day settlement. It also operates an over-the-counter (OTC) desk for businesses and private clients to conduct large volume crypto transactions. Since its launch in 2017 Coindirect has moved more than €300 million (R5.1 billion). To register for Coindirect’s arbitrage service, sign up here. Brought to you by Coindirect. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.