US futures fluctuated and stocks in Europe ticked higher as investors turn their attention to the second-quarter earnings season starting this week in order to gauge whether corporate profitability can support equity valuations. Treasury yields stabilised after Friday’s jump. The Stoxx Europe 600 posted a modest advance at the open, with gains for utilities and real-estate companies offsetting declines for banks and carmakers. Contracts on the S&P 500 edged lower, while those on the Nasdaq 100 were little changed. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Treasuries snapped an eight-session rally Friday that saw 10-year yields tumble as low as 1.25% in a volatile week. They will remain in focus amid new supply coming to the market this week, as well as key US inflation data and Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell’s semi-annual appearance before Congress. The dollar edged higher against major peers. Equities and bonds have rallied amid a decline in long-term interest rates and inflation expectations as central banks aren’t rushing to pull back stimulus that has helped a recovery from the pandemic. Still, investors remain concerned about the spread of delta variant and a slowdown in vaccination rates, while pondering when the Fed will start tapering stimulus.  “There does seem to be a complacency that Goldilocks is not only alive and well, but that it’s getting stronger by the day,” Simon Ballard, First Abu Dhabi Bank chief economist, said on Bloomberg Television. “Unfortunately, it has to be recognised that going forward, the longer that rates remain where they are, the more that we look toward tapering, the more severe and acute could be the reaction.” Elsewhere, Asian stocks rose at the start of the week after China’s central bank moved to boost liquidity by cutting the amount of cash most banks must hold in reserve to buttress economic growth. The euro was little changed after European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde told investors to prepare for new guidance on monetary stimulus in 10 days. Oil extended a decline after its first weekly loss in seven amid an OPEC+ dispute over a production increase. Here are some events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in financial markets: