Moneyweb – a top ‘destination’ for business, finance and investment news in South Africa – is looking to appoint a senior financial journalist to join its team of writers. Position overview Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. We’re looking for a person with a track record of excellent business and investment writing and analysis. The candidate must have a good grasp of the South African business environment, and its global context. They need to have an understanding of the principles of economics and the relationships between different financial instruments, knowledge of JSE-listed stocks, and be able to interpret companies’ financial statements. They must know what makes a good story, have an excellent work ethic and be able to generate great story ideas in discussion with the editorial team. The successful candidate must have experience in covering the financial sector and company news. Main responsibilities Produce well-written, relevant, accurate and balanced business news and investment stories as well as op-eds; Manage multiple stories simultaneously under tight deadlines; Perform any other duty as is reasonably assigned by the editor. Minimum qualifications and requirements Relevant diploma/degree; No less than five years’ experience in journalism, preferably financial journalism; An existing contact base; Excellent communication, writing and editing skills; Thorough understanding of the Press Code; Ability to work under pressure. How to apply Applicants must send a CV and cover letter (no more than 500 words) outlining how they meet the specific requirements of the position and what they can add to Moneyweb, to jobs@moneyweb.co.za. The salary is negotiable and the journalist should preferably have their own transport. Start date: Effective immediately. Closing date for applications: July 30, 2021. Subject reference: Senior financial journalist Moneyweb is an equal opportunity employer. The appointment will be made in line with Moneyweb’s Employment Equity Plan and Policy. Applicants not contacted within 14 days after the closing date should consider their applications unsuccessful