Samsung Electronics has been heavily impacted by the ongoing lawlessness in KwaZulu-Natal, with the company’s distribution centre in Cato Ridge attacked by looters. Samsung South Africa director Justin Hume confirmed via a text message on Tuesday that the Korean electronics giant’s operations in the province have been targeted. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. “Unfortunately, our distribution centre in Cato Ridge was attacked as well as a number of our service centres,” Hume said. “These relate to our consumer electronics ranges — for example, TVs and refrigerators.” Hume said he’ll provide additional information as soon as he has it to hand. TechCentral understands that criminal gangs also broke into facilities owned by LG Electronics, but the publication has not yet been able to reach anyone at the company. Meanwhile, TechCentral has learnt that the Durban offices and warehouse of JSE-listed IT distribution group Mustek were trashed on Monday. Mustek MD Hein Engelbrecht said no employees were present at its Durban offices when the criminals breached the security at the Redlyn Business Park north of the city — the company had told staff to stay at home given the volatile situation. “They attacked the office complex at around midday,” he said. “They hurt the security guards badly and broke down the gate.” The looters then gained access to Mustek’s top-floor sales area, where they proceeded to steal anything they could, but especially TVs, monitors and laptops. They also gained access to Mustek’s warehouse and damaged the company’s fleet of vehicles and stole stock meant for customers. (c) 2021 NewsCentral Media Duncan McLeod is Editor of TechCentral, on which this article was first published here.