Moneyweb boasts a host of original podcasts that cover various themes and topics relevant in South Africa and abroad. All Moneyweb podcasts cover credible, verified and newsworthy content that influence and affect the day-to-day lives of our dynamic and varied audiences.   The Property Pod is South Africa’s premier property investor podcast, with insights from industry executives. This podcast offers in-depth coverage of the local property sector, including commercial (office, retail and industrial/logistics) residential, and specialist sectors such as storage and healthcare. Each episode will cover industry developments, sector performance, trends, as well as new policies/laws affecting the sector from both local government and national government level. This podcast publishes two episodes per month. The Property Pod is hosted by Moneyweb’s deputy editor Suren Naidoo, who has a keen interest in property, tourism, retail, media and sports. Click here to listen to or download Property Pod episodes.   Money Savvy features interviews with certified financial planners and wealth managers to answer readers’ pressing financial questions. Each episode will focus on a specific theme, covering topics such as retirement, retrenchments and investments, to help listeners make better financial decisions. This podcast publishes two episodes per month and is hosted by Boitumelo Ntsoko. Boitumelo is the editor of The Citizen newspaper’s business section, CitiBusiness (which Moneyweb manages), and is passionate about all things personal finance. Click here to listen to or download episodes of the Money Savvy Podcast.   Moneyweb Crypto with Ciaran Ryan explores all things crypto and blockchain: the good, the bad and the impossible. If you’re looking to invest in cryptocurrencies, or understand this evolving universe, you’re in the right place. Ciaran is a Johannesburg-based freelance writer who has a background in finance and mining, having previously headed up a gold mining operation in Ghana. He currently writes for several South African and overseas journals on matters ranging from mining to investment. Click here to listen to or download episodes of Moneyweb Crypto.   MoneywebNOW is South Africa’s premium business breakfast podcast show. The podcast can be livestreamed from Monday to Friday at 06:30, and downloaded from 07:00. The host, Simon Brown, is a trader, investor, money enthusiast, photographer, surfer and beach lover – who brings the latest in business, trading and investment news, as well as insights into world markets and company news, to get you ready for the trading day ahead. Whether you’re listening on your way to work or at home, the podcast promises punchy, informative and bite-sized interviews with industry experts, CEOs, entrepreneurs and more. The MoneywebNOW podcast has yielded just over 250 000 audio downloads in the short time since its inception. Click here to listen to or download episodes.