DP World plans to buy South Africa’s Imperial Logistics for $890 million (R12.8 billion), in what the port operator said would be its most significant acquisition in Africa so far. “Imperial’s business strongly complements DP World existing footprint in Africa and Europe,” the Dubai-based company said, adding that the deal demonstrates long-term confidence in the South African economy and the wider regional market despite recent challenges. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The privately-held company offered R66 ($4.60) per share, a 40% premium to Imperial’s last close. Imperial’s share price surged as much as 36% on Thursday, trading just below the offer price. Even with the rally, the stock still trades below a January 2018 high. DP World is one of the world’s largest operators of marine ports and inland cargo terminals, stretching from gateways in London and Antwerp to hubs in Africa, Russia, India and the Americas. It has been on an acquisition spree as it attempts to become a more diversified, integrated logistics company. The company bought supply chain solutions provider Syncreon Holdings last week for an enterprise value of $1.2 billion. Read: Imperial to net up to R1.45bn from South American shipping business sale Mozambique’s vast gas fields will fuel growth, says Grindrod DP World also continues to look for ways to cut debt and is considering offering international investors a chance to buy into the Jebel Ali Free Zone, a prized asset that helped transform Dubai into a hub of global trade, people familiar with the matter have said. Imperial, meanwhile, started as a small motor dealership in 1940s Johannesburg and now employs more than 25 000 people around the world. Under chief executive officer Mohammed Akoojee, the firm has been looking to dispose of non-core assets and position itself as the gateway to Africa for transporting goods. The company has also been awarded contracts by South Africa to import an unspecified quantity of coronavirus vaccine doses as the country battles one of the worst outbreaks on the continent. The deal is expected to close by the first quarter of 2022.