South Africa’s Covid-19 vaccination program has been partially halted as violent protests following the imprisonment of former President Jacob Zuma rage in two key provinces. State-administered inoculations have been suspended in KwaZulu-Natal and parts of Gauteng, the economic hub, said Nicholas Crisp, a consultant to the National Health Department who is helping oversee the program. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. “We are clearly not going to be putting our staff in harm’s way,” Crisp said in an interview Tuesday, adding that those queuing for vaccines could also be in danger. “It will just have to wait until things calm down.” The disruption is the latest blow to a rollout that’s been criticised for its late start and remains at a nascent stage. Earlier issues include a decision not to use the AstraZeneca Plc vaccine amid fears of its efficacy against the beta variant of the virus, while the delivery of Johnson & Johnson vaccines were delayed after a contamination incident at a U.S. factory. South Africa vaccinated 137,421 people in the 24 hours to 5 p.m. local time on Tuesday compared with more than 191,000 late last week. The health department had expected to inoculate more than 200,000 people a day this week, Crisp said. Fewer than 2,000 doses were administered in KwaZulu-Natal. The setback comes as the country is in the grip of a third wave of Covid-19 infections that have led to the imposition of a curfew, a ban on alcohol sales and restrictions on movement. Of the daily infections recorded in the country, about half are in Gauteng. The unrest has also disrupted access to essential health services, including the collection of chronic medication by tuberculosis, HIV and diabetes patients in some districts in both KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng, the Health Department said in a statement. Below target
Before the violence erupted at the weekend, inoculation numbers had been climbing steadily toward a target of 300,000 a day set by President Cyril Ramaphosa. “Our vaccination program has been severely disrupted just as it is gaining momentum,” Ramaphosa said in a televised address on Monday. “This will have lasting effects on our ability to consolidate some of the progress we were already witnessing in our economic recovery.” Vaccinations and testing by private companies have also been disrupted. Dis-Chem Pharmacies, which provides both services, closed all its drugstores in KwaZulu-Natal on Monday, it said in an emailed response to questions. Some outlets in Gauteng have also been affected by the unrest, it said. Clicks Group has had to close 106 vaccination sites and 279 pharmacy and health stores, it said in an email. Like many businesses, the cost of the looting and damage to stores “is still to be determined given the ongoing unrest,” it said. Discovery, which owns South Africa’s largest medical-scheme administrator, shuttered all its vaccination sites bar one in Cape Town on Tuesday. The company is prioritising the safety of its staff and would reopen when possible, it said in a statement. At more than 2.2 million, South Africa has the highest number of confirmed Covid-19 infections in Africa. More than 65,000 people have officially died of the disease, though health researchers say the real figure may be three times as much. Of almost 4.54 million doses of vaccines administered in the country so far, 24% have been in Gauteng and 21% in KwaZulu-Natal. “A lot of sites are packing up,” said Busisiwe Mavuso, the chief executive officer of Business Leadership South Africa. The riots “are super spreader events.” © 2021 Bloomberg L.P.