Friday morning (July 9) saw Judge Bhekisisa Mnguni of the Pietermaritzburg High Court hand down his judgment dismissing the urgent application by former president Jacob Zuma to stay the order of his arrest. Having handed himself over to the Estcourt Correctional Centre just after midnight on Wednesday, Zuma was already ensconced in prison on Friday, when he would have heard that his urgent application was not only dismissed, but that costs had been awarded against him. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Parties to the hearing The opposing parties to Zuma’s application were the minister of police; the national commissioner for the South African Police Service; the minister of justice and correctional services; the secretary of the Zondo Commission of Inquiry into allegations of state capture, fraud and corruption in the public sector, including organs of state; commission chair Acting Chief Justice Raymond Zondo; the president of the Republic of South Africa; and the Helen Suzman Foundation, which was joined as amicus curiae (friend of the court). The respondents were represented by Tembeka T Ngcukaitobi SC, and the Helen Suzman Foundation by M du Plessis SC. Zuma was represented by Dali Mpofu SC. Background to the contempt of court finding The background to Zuma being found guilty of contempt of court is briefly sketched below: Mnguni considered that the public statements issued by Zuma confirmed his “defiant attitude …evidently calculated to undermine public confidence in the integrity of the Constitutional Court and the judiciary more broadly”. Locus standi of the commission and the foundation Counsel for Zuma, Mpofu, challenged the locus standi of the commission and the foundation. Zuma questioned what constitutional and legal interest the commission had in opposing his application, and contended that the Helen Suzman Foundation is a “busy body”. Mnguni determined that Mpofu’s contentions in regard to the commission “are grounded on an unsound rationale”, and Mpofu’s comments in regard to the Helen Suzman foundation, “misplaced, and falls to be rejected”. Hierarchy of courts Mnguni noted that the constitution provides for the hierarchy of courts, and the ConCourt is the highest court. Mpofu submitted that: Ngcukaitobi and Du Plessis disagreed and contended that the high court only has the power to “suspend its own decisions”. Mnguni found Mpofu’s argument that the high court has concurrent jurisdiction with the ConCourt because of territorial jurisdiction over Zuma, to be “fundamentally flawed”, and that “a high court cannot suspend the execution of an order by the Constitutional Court”. The value of precedence Mguni expounded on the certainty of the law and said it is the duty of the judge to follow previous decisions that have set legal precedence. Mnguni opined that precedence is a core component of the rule of law, providing “certainty, predictability, reliability, equality, uniformity, convenience”. Without which, in the words of Judge of Appeal Cameron in Turnbull-Jackson v Hibiscus Coast Municipality and others: “The courts would operate in a tangle of unknowable considerations”. Mnguni reasoned that should he “accede to the contentions advanced on behalf of [Zuma], then the hierarchy will be disturbed and there will be no finality to legal decisions” and declared that “[what] this application seeks to achieve is to entangle this court in judicial adventurism (which has been strongly deprecated in constitutional democracies), and to make whimsical orders which have the effect of granting unlawful and unwarranted relief”. Zuma also challenged the constitutionality of the CPA Mnguni dismissed Mpofu’s submission that the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Act (CPA) are unconstitutional, and referred to Fakie NO v CCII Systems in which the majority affirmed that “the civil contempt procedure is a valuable and important mechanism for securing compliance with court orders, and survives constitutional scrutiny in the form of motion court applications, adapted to constitutional requirements”. Mnguni said that in his view “this conclusion has the effect of removing all the wind from the sails of the boat upon which Zuma’s contention is journeying”. Mnguni held that: Mnguni concluded: “Unsurprisingly, faced with this seemingly insuperable difficulty in relation to the invocation of the incorrect and unprecedented procedure, the rest of Zuma’s case then collapses like a deck of cards”. Zuma’s rescission application will be heard by the ConCourt on Monday (July 12).