US equity futures steadied on Friday and stocks in Europe rose, while Treasuries halted an eight-day rally fueled by concerns about global growth amid the spread of Covid-19 variants. The Stoxx Europe 600 index advanced, with all sectors in the green, as some of the world’s biggest money managers bet on a swift comeback for the battered reflation trade. Contracts on the S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100 edged higher following Thursday’s selloff in the underlying gauges. The dollar was flat against a basket of major currencies. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. JPMorgan Asset Management, BlackRock Inc. and Morgan Stanley Wealth Management — which together account for some $12 trillion in assets — are among money managers saying global growth is still on track. The European Central bank on Thursday indicated it will tolerate an inflation overshoot, implying an even longer period of loose policy to support the recovery. “The sharp reversal in reflation trades looks overdone to us,” Barclays Plc strategists led by Emmanuel Cau wrote in a note. Still, “erratic price action could continue” amid “poor summer liquidity, activity data peaking, rising Covid cases, supply bottlenecks and the Fed closer to tapering,” they said.  Elsewhere, MSCI Inc.’s Asia-Pacific stock gauge pared declines after reaching the lowest since mid-May. Economically sensitive sectors such as industrials sapped the index, with equities from Japan to Australia retreating. The 10-year Treasury yield remains on course for one of its biggest weekly slides since June 2020. In US hours the 30-year yield broke below 1.90% for the first time since February. Meanwhile, tension between the US and China continues to bubble. Washington will add at least 10 Chinese entities to its economic blacklist as early as Friday over alleged human rights abuses and high-tech surveillance in Xinjiang, according to a report. Oil headed for a weekly loss after being whipsawed by the OPEC+ dispute. Bitcoin is again in the lower part of a trading range, emblematic of a reduced ardor for speculative investments like cryptocurrencies and meme stocks. On the virus front, Pfizer Inc. plans to request US emergency authorization in August for a third booster dose of its Covid-19 vaccine and said it’s confident it will be effective against the more-virulent delta variant. South Korea will raise curbs on social distancing to the highest level in Seoul for two weeks starting Monday. Here are some events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: