You can register here. In today’s ever-changing world, sustainable business practices are no longer an option; they are a necessity. They are important because companies have a significant impact on the environment and society. Moneyweb’s Ciaran Ryan and Mark Boshoff, head of Transformation and Sustainability at Nedbank Business Banking, will be unpacking the value of having a sustainability strategy and explaining the options when it comes to financing your sustainability goals. You will gain insights into sustainability issues and trends such as renewable energy, water conservation, recycling and the green office, as well as Nedbank’s involvement in sustainable projects. You will also get an understanding of its financing solutions for sustainable business practices. This webinar takes place on Tuesday, July 20 at 11am. You can register here. More on the guest Mark Boshoff
Head of Transformation and Sustainability at Nedbank Business Banking Boshoff is a chartered accountant and has a 25-year track record at Nedbank. Blessed with an insatiable curiosity and innovative flair, he has held a variety of roles in different areas within the bank, ranging from financial management, strategy and innovation, and product management and development, to risk and compliance. An opportunity to develop a renewable-energy and efficiency financing offering allowed him to combine his passion for sustainability with creative thinking and finance. The offering later included financing offerings that incorporate renewables, water conservation and recycling. Nedbank’s variety of solutions cater to the needs of like-minded clients ascribing to Nedbank’s philosophy of managing business activities in line with the United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals. When wearing his transformation hat, Boshoff brings investors, business owners and entrepreneurs together with business incubators, coaches, mentors and funders to help them develop small and medium enterprises into viable and growing businesses. As part of his transformation role, Boshoff incorporates empowerment funding as envisaged in the Financial Services Charter to transform the South African economic landscape. In his spare time, Boshoff expresses his creative flair while capturing the world around him in oils on canvas and he is currently learning to play the piano. You can register here.