The shortfall for June was $174 billion, according to Treasury Department data released Tuesday. By comparison, the June 2020 deficit was $864 billion, fueled by mass fiscal stimulus to curb the economic devastation of the pandemic. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. While the monthly deficit is now on the wane, Republicans in Washington have cited the build-up in federal debt in arguing against President Joe Biden’s plans for the biggest ramp-up in social spending programs in decades, aimed at addressing trenchant inequality. Despite rising inflation in some parts of the economy, interest payments on the debt remain historically low — something Democrats have highlighted in playing down debt concerns. The full 2021 fiscal year will see a near-record $3 trillion deficit even without further spending, according to the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office. That’s close to the $3.13 trillion in fiscal 2020, which was the largest relative to the size of the economy since World War II. Spending in June increased 4.6% from the prior month to $623 billion, while receipts fell 3.1% to $449 billion. Stimulus payments fell to $5 billion in June, totaling $560 billion so far this fiscal year. Agriculture spending has skyrocketed 35% so far this year, to $178 billion, amid increased demand for SNAP food stamp benefits that are administered by that department, Treasury officials said on a conference call with reporters. Spending for nutritional assistance has increased to $92.2 billion so far this year, nearly double the level over the same period in 2020, according to the Treasury.