Zimbabwe plans to bring back rhinos to its second-largest national park, Gonarezhou, for the first time since they were wiped out by poachers in 1991. At that time the total number of rhinos in the country fell to just 100 due to poaching and has now increased to 1 000, according to the Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Gonarezhou, which means ‘place of the elephant’ in the Shona language, lies on Zimbabwe’s southern border and forms part of the Great Limpopo Transfrontier Park that links Gonarezhou with the Kruger National Park in South Africa and the Limpopo National Park in Mozambique. At 35 000 square kilometres, it forms one of Africa’s great wilderness areas and is larger than the US state of Maryland. Now “we have very good numbers of rhino,” said Tinashe Farawo, a spokesman for Zimbabwe Parks, on Wednesday. Farawo said the reintroduction of both black and white rhinos, the two species found in Africa, will take place “soon” and would have happened last year if it wasn’t for the coronavirus pandemic. While Zimbabwe has the world’s fourth-largest population of rhinos, neighbouring South Africa houses the bulk of the world’s population of the animals. They are targeted by poachers for their horns, which are ground up into powder and are believed to have medicinal properties in east Asia. Farawo declined to say how many rhinos would be reintroduced or where they would come from. Many parks in neighbouring South Africa won’t disclose their rhino numbers for fear it may attract poachers. © 2021 Bloomberg