There’s evidently only so much you can say when the long-standing CEO of one of the world’s largest consumer goods groups steps down. And it seems Heineken said much of it in February last year when its CEO of 15 years, Francois van Boxmeer, announced his departure. The Heineken board talked about Van Boxmeer’s extraordinary contribution and how the company had grown so much under his leadership. Van Boxmeer spoke about what a privilege and honour it had been to lead Heineken and work with so many great people from all over the world. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Eleven months later AB InBev couldn’t avoid some repetition. The board spoke of its gratitude for Carlos Brito’s tremendous service and leadership in building AB InBev into the world’s leading beer group as well as a “leading global consumer packaged goods company”. Brito, who had been CEO for 15 years, said it had been an honour and privilege to have worked with such talented people around the world. The difference But even the anodyne farewell comments contained the essence of the difference between the two groups and the two men who led them through much of a 25-year long period of unprecedented industry consolidation. AB InBev had spoken of how Brito had “masterfully” integrated the many businesses that comprise AB InBev today. Essentially Brito was an acquisitions man and AB InBev the result of ever-bigger acquisitions. It was a formidable integration process, given that it had been launched on the back of a little-known Brazilian beer company and included the absorption of the powerful Anheuser-Busch just as the global financial crisis hit in 2008. Heineken seemed more nuanced. Van Boxmeer had more than doubled the size of the group on the back of “transformational deals” and “strong organic growth”. The Dutch brewer made no reference to consumer-packaged goods, instead it claimed to be the world’s “most global brewer with iconic brands enjoyed by consumers on all continents”. Evidently Van Boxmeer was not just an acquisitions man and Heineken not just the product of a series of acquisitions – it could grow organically. Interesting battle looms The distinction is extremely significant and could point to the likely victor in the battle between the two new executive teams in the years ahead. Importantly it is not just the two CEOs who have retired, in both cases their CFOs have also stepped down. And at Heineken new CEO Dolf Van den Brink has already replaced seven of the 10 executive committee members. Read: AB InBev tries to sell a better climate with solar-powered beer Ina Verstl, editor of global beer newsletter Brauwelt International, reckons the top-level moves at the number one (AB InBev) and number two (Heineken) beer giants point to a significant change in strategic direction at the two groups. The changes come after a quarter of a century of industry consolidation. They confirm that globalisation in the industry is over, says Verstl. “We’re seeing a paradigm shift, the industry has gone from a focus on growth through acquisition to organic growth.” For the next few years the world’s two biggest beer groups will be using their brands and financial muscle to stake out a larger share of a sluggish beer market, particularly the premium end of that market. This will put pressure on the third and fourth tier players in each market as the two giants use their size to persuade retailers to back their brands. And they will increasingly be looking outside traditional beer products to grow revenue. Beyond the male Verstl says the recently announced discussions between Distell and Heineken is evidence of Van den Brink’s plan to move Heineken beyond its traditional male, beer-drinking image. In an interview with the Financial Times earlier this year the new CEO said Heineken would be investing more into growing low and no-alcohol beers, cider and ‘hard seltzers’ (flavoured alcoholic sparkling water) to bring in female and younger customers. These customers have largely sidestepped beer in preference for spirits, wines and, more recently ‘hard seltzers’. The pandemic appears to have exacerbated that trend as beer groups struggled more to adapt to the sometimes severe Covid lockdown restrictions. While beer consumption was marginally on the rise before Covid it has hit a growth wall especially in China and mature markets such as the US. Africa Verstl reckons Heineken will be hoping that Distell will help it make inroads into the African market, which has so far been long on promise and short on delivery for the beer giants. To date the number two beer group has failed to make much inroad into the South African or rest of Africa market, with SAB continuing to hold onto a dominant position for AB InBev. The South African government’s decision to prohibit alcohol sales didn’t help Heineken’s Africa growth plans. Under the new CEO it decided to abandon a plan to build a R6 billion brewery in KwaZulu-Natal last year and, earlier this year, it pared back on employment. Read: AB InBev, Heineken halt South Africa projects over booze ban In the context of this hesitation the timing of the Distell announcement is interesting. After all, the market has been talking about this deal for a number of years. Verstl speculates that the timing is in line with the new CEO’s “beyond beer” strategy. And given Distell’s recent hefty investment in boosting its African footprint, it would also help develop its emerging market exposure. Strategy? How well either group will be able to adapt to the new organic growth imperative is unclear. Both Heineken and AB InBev were late to the ‘hard seltzer’ party, particularly in the US where it has been a major profit driver for smaller players. Verstl is skeptical about Heineken’s “beyond beer” growth strategy noting that it risks undermining what the group has excelled at to date, namely making and marketing beer. At AB InBev, new CEO Michel Doukeris has a formidable task ahead of him. Independent analyst with Mourmedia.com Chris Gilmour agrees with Verstl that AB InBev has never proven its ability to grow organically. He fears the group’s traditional emphasis on cost-cutting will clash with the need to spend on marketing in the post-consolidation era. “They’ve got some great brands but they seem to struggle to hold on to market share, even in SA,” says Gilmour who adds that although they’ve been very successful on the craft beer front, they appear to be already struggling with ‘hard seltzers’. An additional consideration for any company needing to make long-term investments in market growth is that Doukeris will be under considerably more pressure than his peer at Heineken to convert revenue into more profit. Read: Heineken CEO targets 8 000 job cuts Although Brito’s departure seems to have come as something of a surprise to him, given his dismissal of retirement speculation as recently as last November, the poor performance of the AB InBev share price in recent years made the move inevitable. Verstl says there must have been growing shareholder rumblings over the past four years. “The major shareholders such as 3G, Altria and the Santo Domingo family have no attachment to AB InBev, for them it is just an investment.” By contrast the Heineken family still controls the world’s number two beer group. Dividend pain AB InBev’s decision to scrap last year’s interim dividend because of the impact of Covid, despite reasonably strong sales growth, will have been painful for the shareholders who rely on dividend income. The previous year it was forced to halve its final dividend and back in 2018 it also slashed its dividend in half. The board has had little choice given the $83 billion mountain of debt on the balance sheet. A debt level that has remained daunting despite some significant asset disposals including the sale of the Australian business and the listing of the Hong Kong operation. Verstl describes both as fire sales and says the Hong Kong listing was totally miscalculated as it only brought in $5 billion and not the targeted $9 billion. It’s not that AB InBev isn’t a highly profitable business. With operating margins of 26% it is the most profitable beer group in the world. Last year Heineken’s operating margin dropped 4.5 percentage points to 12.3%. Verstl says the $106 billion acquisition of SABMiller in 2016 was too big and expensive for AB InBev and that it will never escape the debt burden it used to fund the deal. As soon as the market realised this the share price began to flounder. After 25 years of exciting acquisition stories, there was no more excitement for investors, says Verstl. “It’s very difficult to make debt reduction sound enticing to investors.” Gilmour adds that the debt story is likely to become even less enticing given the possibility of some sort of increase in US interest rates. Doukeris will have to persuade investors that AB InBev is about much more than debt reduction. To do this he will have to prove the group can grow organically and not only in the beer market. But he will be up against a formidable opponent.