US equity-index futures headed higher as investors wagered that the Federal Reserve will maintain monetary support in coming months as a rebound in the world’s biggest economy stokes inflation fears. Contracts on the S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100 gauges pointed to gains after US stocks closed mixed on Friday. The dollar and Treasuries were steady. Bitcoin advanced above $35 000 following another weekend of big swings. The Stoxx Europe 600 struggled for traction while shares posted small gains in Japan, China and Australia but retreated in Hong Kong. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. China’s crackdown on commodities speculation weighed on raw-material prices, with steel dropping more than 5% and iron ore tumbling by close to the daily limit. Bloomberg’s industrial metals subindex declined for a fourth day to a one-month low.  Implied volatility for major global indexes remains subdued, suggesting investors aren’t pricing in a surprise from the Fed in the next six months. While market-based gauges of inflation expectations have declined recently, concerns linger that the post-pandemic recovery could stoke price pressures, and some countries also face Covid-19 spikes. Robust corporate earnings, especially in Europe, is underpinning stock prices. “It’s going to be a very mixed market over the next several months until we get more information on what’s really going to happen with inflation and how the stimulus in the U.S. affects spending there, but also how the coronavirus really progresses,” JoAnne Feeney, a partner at Advisors Capital Management LLC, said in a Bloomberg TV interview. WTI crude oil climbed above $64 a barrel amid further signs the US is recovering from the pandemic. Traders also monitored progress in talks to revive an Iranian nuclear deal that could lead to increased global crude supply. Here are some events this week week: These are some of the main moves in markets: