The Financial Sector Conduct Authority (FSCA) has closed its investigation into Ovex (Pty) Ltd, conceding in a statement issued on Friday morning that the company does not require a financial services licence currently. This after the financial watchdog, which is grappling with how to regulate the cryptocurrency sector, found itself with egg on its face after having to withdraw a statement issued on Thursday related to Cape Town-based Ovex. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read: [UPDATE] FSCA issues and withdraws warning on Ovex crypto exchange In its latest brief statement on the matter, the FSCA says while it has previously warned the public that Ovex Pty Ltd does not have a financial services licence, it has now received the necessary information in order to finalise its preliminary investigation. “Based on the information provided by Ovex we are satisfied that Ovex does not currently require a licence from the FSCA, as its business activities fall outside the current jurisdiction of the FSCA,” the financial regulator adds. The FSCA reiterated that its previous media release has been retracted. “The investigation is closed and we apologise for any inconvenience caused as a result of the warning,” its latest statement notes. Ovex offers a crypto arbitrage service. Jon Ovadia, Ovex’s CEO took exception to the FSCA’s initial statement on his company’s business operations on Thursday, saying the warning was damaging to the business and issued without giving the company time to respond to questions sent earlier in the week. He anticipated that the FSCA would issue a full retraction.