An index of emerging market currencies touched all-time highs on Wednesday as the dollar languished at near five-month lows, although the Belarusian rouble lagged amid tensions with the West. Turkey’s lira staged a modest recovery after the replacement of yet another central banker saw it post its worst day in two weeks on Tuesday, while South Africa’s rand held near highs last seen more than two-years ago. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read: Rand hits R13.85 to the dollar The dollar remained close to five-month lows as easing inflation worries prompted investors to seek returns from higher yielders. “The continual commentary from (US Federal Reserve) officials reinforcing the current Fed accommodative policy is pushing US yields lower, keeping the dollar on the back foot, and helping risk appetite,” said Andre Cilliers, currency strategist at TreasuryONE. Russia’s rouble rose 0.14%, hovering close to mid-March highs. Leaders of Russia and the United States will meet in Geneva on June 16, the nations said on Tuesday, amid sharp disputes over election interference, cyber atttacks, human rights and Ukraine. Both countries, however, have lowered expectations for breakthroughs, with neither in a mood to make concessions on their many disagreements. Meanwhile, a Reuters poll showed expectations Russia’s stock market would hit 3 819 to notch a record high by year-end thanks to a recovery in commodity prices and still-low interest rates globally. The MOEX index was last trading at 3,703.09 after touching a new high of 3,717.33 earlier in the session. MSCI’s index of EM stocks extended gains for a second straight session to climb to a 16 day high with tech stocks showing healthy gains. In Belarus, the rouble fell 0.1% against the greenback as airlines re-routed flights to avoid the country’s airspace and Belarusian planes faced a possible ban from Europe, with international outrage mounting over Minsk forcing down a jetliner and arresting a dissident journalist on board. The currency is up about 4% this year after plunging 19% last year after the disputed election of Alexander Lukashenko roiled markets – its worst yearly performance since 2015.