E-tolls have not officially been scrapped — at least not for now. This is despite Gauteng transport MEC Jacob Mamabolo stating during a radio interview on Thursday that e-tolls are “being scrapped”. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Acting Minister in the Presidency Khumbudzo Ntshavheni said during a post-cabinet meeting media briefing on Thursday that a decision on the future of e-tolls has not yet been taken by cabinet. Ntshavheni said she thinks what Mamabolo was communicating “is the position of Gauteng, which is not new”. Gauteng vs national government “Gauteng has always lobbied for the scrapping of e-tolls and they have lobbied the national government for that and we continue to say what are the permutations that will enable that, should that happen given the financial commitments that have been made with the Gauteng Road Improvement Programme [GFIP]. “But there is no decision at cabinet as we speak today around the scrapping of e-tolls or non scrapping of e-tolls and the minister of transport continues to engage with all the parties that are relevant – the National Treasury, the Gauteng government – and also continues to update cabinet on the progress, research and various proposals that cabinet is considering and once considered, for the decision to be made. “When cabinet is ready to take the decision, and when all matters have been considered, cabinet will take the decision and an announcement will be made,” she said. Mamabolo referred in an interview on national radio station SAfm to comments by Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula this week that a decision on the future of e-tolls is imminent. “We [provincial transport department] are already in our state of mind, and just in terms of our legitimate expectations, already living in the post-e-tolls period. We already believe that any announcement is imminent … but [cabinet] ministers, in what they have said, they’ve talked about ‘good news’. “Imminent good news to us already means we are looking to a completely new e-toll dispensation, and we are just waiting for that to be formalised. “But where we are, there’s no turning back on the e-tolls. E-tolls are a thing of the past and we are just waiting for that to be formalised, to be confirmed,” he said. Not fare for Gauteng “They’re being scrapped. The people of Gauteng should not be burdened with paying for national roads that serve all of us, that serve neighbouring states, that serve the whole economy of our country. That is unfair to leave it to the people of Gauteng. “All of us must pay, all of us must carry the burden. It must be fair, and it must be equitable. It is completely wrong to leave the burden of the national roads that support the economy only, exclusively, to the people of Gauteng. They have to be scrapped,” he said. The Automobile Association of South Africa (AA) said that while it shares Mamabolo’s sentiments that the system should be scrapped, no formal announcement has been made that they have been scrapped. The association said that if a decision is taken regarding the scrapping e-tolls, several key questions must be answered, including whether people who have been paying e-tolls will be reimbursed and will outstanding debt owed to the system also be scrapped. New model needed The AA said the future funding model is also an important issue that must be dealt with apart from simply saying that the system has been scrapped. It reiterated its position that: Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse (Outa) CEO Wayne Duvenage said the government is making out that they are still contemplating the ramifications and permutations of scrapping e-tolls but claimed all that work has been done. “I think that Mamabolo’s comment is the telling one. He says e-tolls have been scrapped and he’s let the cat out of the bag. “That is the only decision they can make whether they want to announce it today or two months before the election, who knows [but] it’s dead,” he said. Compliance rates could drop Duvenage believes Mamabolo’s comments will result in a further reduction in e-toll payment rates and, if compliance rates are at 18% or 16%, they will drop by a few percentage points again. He also poured cold water on the AA’s view that people who paid their e-tolls should be reimbursed. Duvenage said there is no chance of that happening at all because there is no legal reason why the state has to repay it. “There is a law in place and they [government] will say they were complying with the law. Those who paid, paid because they wanted to stay on the right side of the law. “The 80% that didn’t [pay] said we are going to defy an unjust law and will face the consequences of summonses, jail time if need be, fines whatever,” he said. Duvenage added that the SA National Roads Agency (Sanral) has dropped “the enforcement ball” and is now unable to prosecute, withhold motorists’ licences or use blacklisting to force motorists to pay their e-tolls. “Those people who decided to pay decided to pay out of convenience and most of them are corporates who have passed those costs on to consumers already. It’s never going to happen. “There will be no refund. The state doesn’t have the money, it’s going to be impossible to do and they don’t have to and they are not going to,” he said.