Asian stocks fell with US and European equity futures Wednesday as concerns about faster inflation and Covid-19 flareups in some nations rattled investors. A dollar gauge was near the lowest level this year. Australian equities had their worst day in almost three months. Shares also fell in Japan and China after key US equity benchmarks closed lower and large technology stocks like Amazon.com Inc. and Microsoft Corp. erased gains. S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100 futures were in the red along with European contracts. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies extended a tumble in part after the People’s Bank of China conveyed a statement reiterating that digital tokens can’t be used as a form of payment. A slide in crude on rising US stockpiles and the possibility of more supply from Iran hurt energy stocks. Treasury yields were steady. Markets were closed Wednesday in Hong Kong and South Korea.  Stocks have been volatile after touching a record in early May, whipsawed by concerns about accelerating inflation amid elevated commodity prices, as well as a Covid-19 resurgence in some countries. Federal Reserve officials have repeatedly indicated that they see recent price pressures as transitory and intend to keep policy accommodative for some time to come. Traders are awaiting the latest Fed minutes for the clues about the outlook. “The market has been trying to process a very unusual economic environment and a confluence of factors that it has not faced for a long time,” said David Donabedian, chief investment officer of CIBC Private Wealth Management. “I personally would say that the stock market has absorbed it all extremely well because there’s still a high conviction view on earnings being strong.” In Bank of America Corp.’s latest fund manager survey, inflation topped the list of the biggest tail risks, followed by a bond market taper tantrum and asset bubbles. Covid-19 was in fourth place. Here are some key events this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: