Global stocks fell to a six-week low and US equity futures retreated as inflation fears continued to depress investor sentiment. The MSCI World Index sank for a fourth day, losing 0.5% in the longest selloff since September. S&P 500 contracts dipped 0.4%, while Asian and European equities saw steeper losses. Oil declined as the largest US gasoline pipeline resumed service. Bitcoin dropped to $50 000 as Tesla Inc. suspended purchases using the cryptocurrency. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Confidence that reigned supreme until two weeks ago on the US economy and continued Fed stimulus has been jolted in the past week with non-farm payrolls falling far short of expectations and inflation rising by the most since 2009. While some investors insist the surge in consumer prices is a one-off reopening burst, the broader markets are hedging against the possibility it may persist and force the Fed to consider tapering its stimulus.  “Markets have lost a little bit of confidence that the Fed has control of inflation” and the concern was that the central bank might wait too long to address the rise, Victoria Fernandez, Crossmark Global Investments chief market strategist, said on Bloomberg TV. “I am not sure the market is extremely comfortable with that at this point.” In Europe, earnings disappointments added to the gloom. BT Group Plc dropped 3% as it missed estimates. Burberry Group Plc declined 9% as guidance disappointed. Treasury markets were calmer, with the 10-year rate holding near 1.69%. Meanwhile, Bitcoin slumped as much as 15% before rebounding after Elon Musk tweeted that Tesla was no longer accepting the digital currency for vehicle purchases due to environmental concerns. These are some of the main moves in markets: