US equity futures eked out small gains on Friday after solid economic data and President Joe Biden’s federal spending plans spurred a Wall Street rally in cyclical shares. Treasury yields climbed and the dollar strengthened. The Stoxx Europe 600 index advanced, led by raw-material producers and banks. MSCI Inc.’s Asia-Pacific equity gauge was set for the highest close in a month, with shares in Japan outperforming. Earlier, industrial and financial equities fueled a modest overall increase in the S&P 500, which is on track for a fourth month of gains, with small-caps outperforming. The tech-heavy Nasdaq 100 slipped. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. US data included a drop in jobless claims to a fresh pandemic low. Biden is reportedly set to unveil a budget that would take federal spending to $6 trillion in the coming fiscal year. Investors will watch data on personal spending later Thursday for further clues on the inflation outlook. The 10-year US Treasury yield reached 1.62% amid growth optimism and concerns of more debt supply to fund spending. The yen fell as Japan recommended extending a state of emergency that includes Tokyo to curb infections. China signaled the yuan’s recent appreciation is too rapid, with a weaker-than-expected reference rate.  Global stocks are set to climb for a fourth month, supported by the economic rebound from Covid-19. Comments from Federal Reserve officials have helped temper fears that inflation could spark a faster-than-expected reduction in stimulus. Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said she sees the burst in prices as temporary, though likely to last through the end of 2021. “Between now and year end, we see a little more room for stocks to move up from where they are today and the highs they already achieved earlier this year,” Lori Calvasina, head of US equity strategy at RBC Capital Markets LLC, wrote in a note. “But we don’t think that the path to get there will be smooth and think a short-term pullback before the year is up remains likely.” Elsewhere, oil was steady around a two-year peak but gold retreated. Bitcoin slipped further below the $40 000 level. Copper and iron ore gained, even after several Chinese commodity firms pared back their bullish futures bets at the request of the government in a further sign of Beijing’s concern over this year’s surge in raw materials. These are some of the main moves in markets: