Asian stocks and US and European futures traded mixed Monday after signs China’s economic recovery may be leveling out and as investors continue to weigh global inflation risks. Japan underperformed amid concern about an extended state of emergency to curb the coronavirus. Shares fell in Hong Kong and fluctuated in China, where a gauge of the manufacturing industry suggested the economy’s recovery momentum might have peaked. US futures ticked up after the S&P 500 notched its fourth-straight monthly advance. European contracts declined. Treasury yields dropped below 1.60% on Friday. There’s no Treasuries cash trading in Asia amid holidays in the US and UK. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The offshore yuan stabilised in the wake of comments leaning against its climb. Two state-run newspapers flagged risks fueled by rapid gains in the currency. China also set its daily reference rate at a weaker-than-expected level. Bitcoin traded below $35 000 after a Friday slump as Bank of Japan Governor Haruhiko Kuroda warned about the token’s volatility and speculative trading.  Global stocks remain near a record, lifted by the ongoing economic recovery from the pandemic and injections of stimulus. The rally has so far weathered concerns that price pressures could force an earlier-than-expected reduction in central bank support. But investors remain sensitive to the risk, and this week’s US non-farm payrolls report could buffet markets if it changes perceptions of the rebound’s strength. A purchasing managers’ index report in China showed input costs for manufacturers jumped to the highest in about a decade. “Policy makers have committed to accepting a higher level of inflation, higher volatility in inflation and as that happens you will see inflation moving structurally higher,” Mixo Das, JPMorgan Asia equity strategist, said on Bloomberg TV. “I don’t think this is in the prices yet.” Here are key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: