Green tech is certainly an exciting investment space but many of the stocks have very stretched valuations because of that excitement. Brian Arcese from Foord Asset Management talked us through the sector pointing out that we could also invest in allied industries that will benefit from the growth in green tech. His preferred pick right now is Quanta Services that still offers decent valuations.  Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Redefine remains under pressure with its office-heavy portfolio. But loan-to-value (LTV) is improving, and I spoke with CEO Andrew König about the company’s target to get the LTV below 40%. This will involve asset sales, but also revaluation of existing assets. Of note was that it values its buildings twice a year when the industry average is to do so over a rolling three-year period.  The tech sector has been under pressure, albeit from lofty valuations at the end of 2020. I spoke with Craig Antonie – CIO, AnBro Capital who runs a tech unicorn fund, asking him how they respond to share prices falling. In particular I wanted to know what metrics they use for exiting existing holdings as surely price is not the key measure of long-term quality?  The crypto market had a horror week as the entire space lost some 20% in value on Wednesday. But the bigger question I was asking Alex Simeonides from Capital Legacy was how do your crypto (and other virtual assets) fit into your will, and ultimately your estate?  Also this week: Is the Fed risking being behind the curve? Viv Govender of Rand Swiss on the US jobs recovery. Shane Curran of Investsure unpacks the ins and outs of insuring your shares. Carel de Wit, Indluplace CEO talks the company’s financials. 