Here’s a lesson in what can happen when governments renege on contracts. In this case, solar power company Frazer Solar GmbH was awarded €50 million (R856 million) in damages by a South African court after the Lesotho government reneged on a contract, which was to be funded by the German government, as part of a wider programme to turn Lesotho into a net exporter of electricity. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. A binding agreement was sealed in 2018 between Frazer Solar and Lesotho for the provision of up to 40 000 solar water heating systems, 20MW of solar photovoltaic capacity, one million LED lights and 350 000 solar lanterns nationwide. In a statement issued by Withers Worldwide, the lawyers acting for Frazer Solar, it seems the project stalled in October 2018 when Lesotho’s Ministry of Finance refused to finalise and execute the project’s financial agreements. “Following this breach, Frazer Solar commenced arbitration proceedings in South Africa. No explanation for this refusal [to execute the agreements] has been provided to Frazer Solar by the government of Lesotho, but the resulting legal action concluded that a competing project had been prioritised.” In March this year, Frazer Solar had completed a similar project in Eswatini, delivering hot water to every single government health clinic.  ‘The Government of Lesotho was given an outstanding opportunity to transform access to clean, renewable energy and to eradicate the use of damaging, polluting alternatives nationwide,” says Hussein Haeri, partner and co-head of International Arbitration at Withers LLP. “Instead, it prevented the project from proceeding, contravened its legal obligations and left Frazer Solar with no alternative than to bring legal proceedings.” The Lesotho government might want to read up on what can happen when international agreements are flouted. Assets seized from other countries In 2012, the Argentine Navy ship Libertad was seized by a court in Ghana after hedge fund NML Capital filed a suit in an Accra court as the ship docked for resupply. NML Capital owned $1 billion in debt that Argentina had refused to pay. The judge granted the injunction to seize the ship until Argentina posted $20 million to the court in partial settlement of the debt owed to NML Capital. In 2001, Argentina defaulted on $100 billion in debt, but settled 93% of that debt over the ensuing years, but NML formed part of the remaining 7% that had not been paid. The Libertad was eventually released after Argentina argued that war ships, under a UN convention, are immune from civil claims in foreign ports. Meanwhile, the US government seized a Manhattan skyscraper worth more than $1 billion belonging to Iran over disputes going back to 1979 and the Islamic revolution when US citizens were taken hostage in the US embassy in Tehran. ‘Liquidated damages’ clause In a statement issued this week by Withers Worldwide, Frazer Solar “contends that the Government of Lesotho failed to fulfil its contractual obligations under the supply agreement, and in July 2019 gave notice to [the government of Lesotho] concerning the commencement of arbitration proceedings, in line with the dispute resolution mechanism agreed by both parties”. It adds: “As a deterrent for breaches of the contract, both parties agreed to a ‘liquidated damages’ clause in the supply agreement, which allocated a pre-agreed and capped sum to be paid in the event that either party did not fulfil its contractual obligations. “The independent arbitrator directed the government of Lesotho to pay Frazer Solar damages of €50 million, in addition to pre-award interest of €754 273, and post-award interest of 1.7% per annum.” Timeline of events: Moneyweb reached out to Withers LLP, which said it had no further statement to make on the matter. A request for comment was also submitted to the Office of the Prime Minister in Lesotho. No reply had been received at the time of publication. This story will be updated once a reply is received.