Asian stocks and US equity futures rose Tuesday following a Wall Street rally, buoyed by soothing Federal Reserve comments on inflation and China’s efforts to temper commodity prices. MSCI Inc.’s Asia-Pacific equity index was set for the highest close in about two weeks. China’s CSI 300 gauge surged about 3% following Beijing’s efforts to talk down raw material costs. European and US stock futures climbed after the S&P 500 advanced and the Nasdaq 100 outperformed overnight. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The Fed comments aided sentiment, as officials reiterated they expect transitory rather than lasting price pressures from the US economic rebound. Treasury yields held a retreat and the dollar extended a decline. Oil retained the biggest two-day gain since March as investors tracked a recovery in demand that may enable the market to accommodate any fresh flows from Iran should the nation’s nuclear deal be revived.  Fed officials Lael Brainard, Raphael Bostic and James Bullard said they wouldn’t be surprised to see bottlenecks and supply shortages push prices up in coming months as the pandemic recedes, but that much of those gains should be temporary. While market-based measures of inflation expectations have dipped, investors remain cautious about the risk of a pullback in stimulus. They are also monitoring Covid-19 spikes in regions such as Asia. “Inflation is a key focus for investors, meaning uncertainty over what happens to interest rates,” Chris Iggo, chief investment officer of core investments at AXA Investment Managers, wrote in a note. “Yield curves have stabilized, but it is not clear that renewed inflation concerns automatically mean steeper curves.” Elsewhere, Bitcoin trimmed a rally stoked partly by Elon Musk’s support for an effort to improve its green credentials. The largest cryptocurrency remains about $25 000 off its mid-April record. Here are some events this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: