US equity futures climbed and Asian stocks were mixed Monday following another record high for the S&P 500 Index as weak jobs data reinforced the case for stimulus. Gasoline and crude oil rose after a cyberattack forced the closure of a key US pipeline. The materials sector led gains in an Asia-Pacific share index as commodities advanced. Australian stocks ended at an all-time high, while Hong Kong and China dropped. Gasoline jumped as much as 4.2% to a three-year high before paring the increase, with US operator Colonial Pipeline providing no timeline for a restart following a shutdown late Friday due to a ransomware attack. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Iron ore futures surged and copper jumped to a record amid growing bets they’ll be among the biggest winners from a commodities boom. Treasury yields edged up toward 1.60% as traders brace for a busy week of auctions. Meanwhile, China’s onshore yuan hit its strongest level versus the dollar since 2018. The pound touched a 10-week high after UK elections denied Scotland’s main independence party an outright majority and strengthened the grip of the Conservatives.  The energy price surge is adding to the inflation debate ahead of a US CPI report this week that is forecast to show prices rising further in April. Investors will also parse comments from a series of Federal Reserve speakers for guidance on their thinking about the path of growth and policy following some softer-than-anticipated U.S. economic data. “At the moment the view is very much that inflation is transitory,” Mo Apabhai, head of Asia trading strategy at Citigroup Global Markets, said on Bloomberg Television. “At the end of the day the disinflationary forces are still very strong in the economy.” US jobs rose by 266 000 in April, trailing the projected one million jump, and suggesting that the Fed may hold its accommodative stance for even longer. Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said the report “underscores the long-haul climb back to recovery,” while reiterating her expectation for a return to full employment next year. Here are some key events to watch this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: