CBZ Holdings Ltd., the biggest bank in Zimbabwe, plans to list on the US dollar-denominated stock exchange in Victoria Falls, as part of efforts to ignite foreign interest in the lender. The firm is “actively exploring” a listing, which could address concerns for foreign investors of having funds stuck in the country, Chief Executive Officer Blessing Mudavanhu said in an interview at the lender’s headquarters in Harare on Friday. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The lender is currently only listed on the main exchange in Harare. CBZ Chairman Marc Holtzman, a 30-year banking veteran who has worked at Barclays Plc and ABN Amro Bank NV, said the Victoria Falls listing will take place this year. “If the Victoria Falls Stock Exchange does everything we believe and think it can do, there’ll be no need to list dually,” Holtzman said during the interview. A listing on the so-called “VFEX” will also provide the lender with an avenue to also explore growth opportunities, particularly within the southern African region. “We still have a huge appetite for the local market, however we cannot rule out expansion outside of Zimbabwe when the opportunity arises,” said Holtzman. CBZ has signed on to two US-based correspondent banking relationships since the US Treasury Department cleared the lender of a $385 million penalty for processing transactions on behalf of ZB Bank Ltd., which was then under American sanctions. “This has improved our operations significantly,” Holtzman said. The lender on Friday reported that full-year 2020 profit jumped more than sixfold to Z$6.15 billion, from Z$920 million in 2019.