Stocks rose with US futures on Friday as investor optimism in the prospects for growth got a boost from strong earnings and economic readings. The Stoxx Europe 600 Index climbed, with Richemont pushing luxury shares higher after the maker of Cartier jewelry reported sales that topped estimates. Contracts on all three US benchmarks were higher, signaling more stock gains after initial jobless claims dropped to a fresh pandemic low on Thursday. Asian shares were mostly higher, although they slipped in China. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Treasury yields slipped and the dollar edged higher. Gold hovered around the highest level in more than four months. Bitcoin steadied after a volatile cryptocurrency slump this week.  The global economic revival, the risk of a significant pickup in inflation and Covid-19 flareups in some parts of the world continue to shape market moves. Stocks have been volatile this week, with speculative ardor cooling as investors took in minutes from the latest Federal Reserve meeting that flagged the possibility of a debate at some point on scaling back stimulus measures. “Overall we’re still quite risk-on,” Adrian Zuercher, head of global asset allocation at UBS Chief Investment Office, said on Bloomberg Television, adding the vaccine rollout and reopening of the economy “should lead to higher equity markets” and that the “reflation trade is not over yet.” Elsewhere, Brent oil headed for the biggest weekly decline since March on prospects of increased Iranian supply as the nation inches closer to a revived nuclear deal. In Hong Kong, Tencent Holdings Ltd. slid after pledging a sharp boost in investment. Here are some key events this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: