Asian stocks and US futures rose Tuesday with investors weighing the pace of growth as economies reopen against a pick-up in virus cases in the region. The dollar dipped. Taiwan outperformed, jumping as much as 5.2%, as the financial stabilisation fund said it was monitoring stocks after the worst rout in more than a year and data showed foreign investors had continued buying during the selloff. Japan and Hong Kong paced gains in a gauge of the region’s stocks. Earlier, technology and communication services stocks led US stocks lower as volatility ticked up. European futures climbed. Treasuries were stable after retreating. A Bloomberg gauge of the dollar fell to near a four-month low touched last week. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Oil was up marginally and near a two-year high amid optimism around a demand recovery in regions such as the US, even as coronavirus flares up in parts of Asia.  Investors this week will parse the minutes from the Federal Open Market Committee’s latest meeting for any discussion about accelerating price pressures, and hints of a timeline for reducing asset purchases. Federal Reserve Vice Chair Richard Clarida said during a webinar that the weaker-than-expected April payroll report shows “we have not made substantial further progress” on the central bank’s goals for employment and inflation laid out as thresholds to begin scaling back the central bank’s massive monthly bond purchases. “Hotter inflation has materialized and market volatility is rising as the economic restart gathers pace,” according to BlackRock Investment Institute strategists lead by Jean Boivin. “This is playing out in line with our view that the economy is in a ‘restart.’ We prefer to look through any volatility and see a later ‘lift-off’ from zero rates than markets expect. This means higher-than-expected inflation in the medium term, and underpins our pro-risk stance.” Elsewhere, Bitcoin fluctuated following a volatile weekend that saw comments from Tesla Inc.’s Elon Musk whipsaw prices. Coinbase Global Inc. fell to a record low and below the reference price used in its April direct listing. Gold traded near its highest in almost four months. Asian copper miners advanced as they may benefit from tighter regulations and higher taxes that could hit top producer Chile. Here are some key events this week: These are some of the main moves in markets: