It is safe to say that few people expected that international luxury group Compagnie Financière Richemont would have been able to report an increase of 38% in earnings to nearly €1.29 billion in its financial year to March 31, 2021. In rand terms, earnings increased by 61% to R24.5 billion, according to the note that Richemont usually adds to the results to acknowledge the special interest that SA investors have in the group. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Read: Jewellery helps Richemont shine, boosting dividend (May 21) Only a few months ago, when Richemont published its sales report for the nine months to end December 2020, things looked bad. Management reported towards the end of January 2021 that sales for the first nine months of the financial year were 16% lower than in the previous year. Sales only improved by 1% in the third quarter – the three months to December, which included the very important Christmas and holiday season. Sharp turnaround Things went extremely well in the last three months. Chair Johann Rupert notes in his report to shareholders that sales increased by 30% since January 2021. This sharp turnaround limited the damage and total sales were only 8% lower in a very difficult year compared to the previous year. During a discussion of the results, CEO Jérôme Lambert and CFO Burkhart Grund both noted that the push came from a huge increase in sales from mainland China. The figures disclosed that Asia Pacific was the only region where sales increased during the past year, thanks to a more than 100% increase in the last quarter of the year. All the other territories experienced lower sales. Sales fell by 30% in Europe, which was hit harder than most countries by Covid-19 lockdowns. This was due in part to several restrictions on travel, forcing free-spending tourists to stay home. Unbelievably, sales in China increased by 106% in the last quarter of Richemont’s financial year (the first three months of calendar 2021). Lambert reasoned that the huge increase in sales can be attributed to the fact that China was the first major economy to start recovering after the disruptions caused by the pandemic. The figures also show that China was by far the biggest market for Richemont’s (expensive) luxury goods. Sales by region (€m) Source: Richemont Annual Results 2021 At more than €5.29 billion, sales revenue from China amounted to 45% of total sales during the last financial year. It was just lower than sales in Europe, the US, Canada and South America combined. Lambert noted that sales in China have continued to grow subsequent to the group’s year-end in March. The growing middle class and the wealthier rich in China bought mostly jewellery. They bought the beautiful creations of Cartier and Van Cleef & Arpels in retail shops when shopping centres reopened. One does not need to look much further than global GDP figures to understand the importance of China. While China is often seen as the world’s second largest economy after the US in terms of nominal GDP, figures from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) show that it is actually much larger than the US when comparing GDP on a purchasing power parity (PPP) basis. China took the lead on a PPP basis in 2016 and has been increasing the gap every year ever since. When it comes to shopping – or selling desirable products – purchasing power is the key. Online sales The annual results disclosed that online retail sales increased 9% worldwide. “In the fourth quarter of the financial year, online sales rose by 22%. Online retail sales at our Maisons recorded triple-digit growth, driven by jewellery and the specialist watchmakers,” said Lambert. Overall, the share of online retail rose to 21% of group sales from 19% a year ago. Prior to that, online sales were relatively unimportant. The figures show that online sales is growing, while wholesale sales are declining. Lambert noted in his presentation that digital sales channels increased direct engagement with clients. Together with the growth in Richemont’s own retail and franchised outlets, 76% of all sales are directly to the final user. This is bringing buyers closer to the originators, designers and craftsmen of the luxury goods. This strategy worked, considering that sales increased to more than €2 billion per month during a very difficult year. For the sake of interest, the annual sales of more than R250 billion at actual exchange rates to the rand equalled nearly R700 million every day last year. Good sales, improving margins and strict cash management boosted cash flow, leaving Richemont with cash of nearly €3.4 billion at year-end. Surprise That the results surprised investors can be seen in the sudden jump in Richemont’s share price when the results were announced. The share increased nearly 5%, to CHF99.32 on the Swiss exchange and to above R154 on the JSE, close to its annual high. Usually, local investors would have had an inkling of good results as JSE regulations require that companies publish a trading update as soon as management becomes aware that earnings or headline earnings will differ more than 20% compared to previous figures. However, Richemont is the exception to this rule due to the nature of the listing of American depository receipts on the JSE, despite the 61% increase in earnings and 55% increase in headline earnings per share. Andre Visser, director of Issuer Regulation at the JSE, says Richemont has a secondary listing on the JSE and only subject to limited continuing obligations of the exchange. Not that shareholders are queuing to complain about the surprise, or that Richemont announced that it doubled its annual dividend to CHF2.00 per share, equal to CHF0.13 per Richemont ADR on the JSE after Swiss dividend withholding tax. The rand amount will be determined closer to the payment date in September.