Former president Jacob Zuma and French arms company Thales were back in court on Wednesday (May 25) to face criminal charges. Zuma was represented by advocates Dali Mpofu SC and Thabani Masuku SC, and Thales by Samantha Jackson. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The court was previously adjourned so that Zuma’s counsel could serve the special plea under Section 106(1)(h) of the Criminal Procedures Act that state prosecutor Billy Downer recuse himself. Preliminary matters Downer informed the court that he had received the “voluminous” plea together with annexures a weeks ago, consisting of more than 1 000 pages. The plea covers the entire period of the litigation, some 16 years. The state needs time to answer by affidavit, and counsel has been instructed. As Downer is the subject he cannot do it himself. Zuma’s papers were also not complete, and his counsel has been presented with a list indicating where the papers are incomplete. The parties agreed that the plea would be heard on July 19. Downer submitted two certificates to the court: Indictment Downer put the criminal charges to Zuma and Thales, which include: Mpofu reads a statement in regard to the plea Mpofu asked Judge Piet Koen for leave to read a statement in regard to Zuma’s “special plea”, stating that Zuma’s trial will be unfair. Koen replied that he did not want to hear matters that have previously been ventilated, saying “it will not serve much purpose to ventilate it today”. Mpofu commenced his reading, noting that it has been a long road to get here, and that the intention is to place as much of Zuma’s affidavit in the court record as possible. Zuma has the right to a fair trial, and this must be respected by the state. Mpofu then turned his attention to Downer, accusing Downer of: Koen interrupted and said the three pillars of the special plea are the National Prosecuting Authority affidavit, connivance with journalists, and connivance with foreign intelligence agencies. He said the purpose of Mpofu’s statement is to sketch the basis of the plea, and that affidavits must still be exchanged, “the purpose of you addressing me has been fulfilled”. At this point Mpofu said he would like to address Koen in his chambers. Koen replied that the process must be transparent and dealt with in open court. Masuku – ‘bear with us’ Masuku requested leave from Koen to “bear with us for 30 minutes”, as it is “important that you understand the basis of the plea”. Masuku explained that Zuma as a political leader with a significant constitutionality, and that the public must know why he is in court, “even if it means that it is a repetition of what my learned friend [Mpofu] said”. Koen said he understood that Zuma’s plea “is tied up with political considerations”. Masuku alerted the court to the unlawful activities and interference by “foreign intelligence agencies”. Zuma alleged that Leonard McCarthy, who in 2003 headed up the disbanded Directorate of Special Prosecutions (Scorpions), concocted the Shaik trial for political ends, to get at Zuma. He also alleged that McCarthy is a Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) operative. Regarding McCarthy’s investigations, he said it was a criminal offence not to have revealed this. Koen eventually interrupted and said that Masuku wasn’t adding much to the discussion for present purposes and that matters can be well ventilated on July 19. Thales and Zuma denied guilt on all charges. The following timetable was made an order of court The state will deliver its affidavit on June 2; Zuma’s replying affidavit will be delivered on the June 9; Zuma’s heads of argument is due on July 5; The state’s heads of argument is due on July 12; and The hearing of the special plea is set for July 19.