It has been a year since corporate governance teams around the globe scrambled to pivot their organisations’ board meetings from traditional boardrooms to virtual meeting platforms. Organisations everywhere were faced with the challenge of replicating the confidentiality and collegiality of in-person board meetings in a digital environment. As Nasdaq’s corporate governance team navigated an entire board season filled with virtual events and meetings, we found that with the right ideas, tools, people, and support, it is possible to digitise the boardroom without compromising efficiency, confidentiality, or group dynamics. We also learned that there are several benefits of hosting board meetings virtually. This guide, based on Nasdaq’s key learnings, is intended to help you plan and execute virtual board meetings that facilitate a stronger, more engaged board for your organisation. Build a virtual board table It is possible to replicate the experience of sitting at a board table in a virtual meeting room by leveraging certain features of video conferencing platforms. With that in mind, look for opportunities to work with your platform provider to customise functionality and meet your organisation’s needs. Following are several ways to enhance and implement technology to replicate the in-person board meeting experience as closely as possible. Mitigate meeting day glitches Keep it confidential Confidentiality of board meeting materials and discussions is always paramount, no matter the venue. However, it can be harder to preserve confidentiality in a virtual boardroom where participants join from home offices, bedrooms, hotel rooms, or even shared workspaces. Through a combination of equipment, technical support, and gentle reminders, helps ensure that what happens in the virtual boardroom stays in the virtual boardroom. Our most important takeaway from a year of planning and executing virtual board meetings was this: by creatively leveraging technology to model in-person meetings as closely as possible, the board can continue to operate on all cylinders even in a digital environment. While executives and directors are no doubt anxious to return to in-person engagement and the connectedness it brings, it is safe to expect that the post-pandemic era will usher in a hybrid board meeting protocol – one that mixes in-person and virtual meeting formats to leverage the advantages of both. In the meantime, virtual board meeting best practices will continue to evolve, and corporate governance professionals will continue to learn from each other as they do. Reimagine governance practices and digitise your boardroom with Nasdaq Boardvantage®. Nasdaq’s board portal software can help enhance the effectiveness of virtual meetings, collaboration, and decision-making processes to drive the business forward for your organisation. You can learn more here. Brought to you by Nasdaq. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.