Dudu Myeni failed to appear at the Zondo Commission on Tuesday (May 25) to give evidence on Eskom and aviation-related matters. She last appeared before the commission on November 4, 2020, and in the misguided belief that she had the right to remain silent, did so for most of her “testimony” – until it came to disclosing the identity of a protected witness. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Then she chose to speak up. Discussion of Myeni’s non-appearance Evidence leader Kate Hofmeyr said that Myeni’s non-appearance “is nothing less than a defiance of the commission, and it is time for the law to take its course”. Evidence leader Pule Seleka SC said that in October 2020 the commission requested Myeni to file an affidavit in regard to Nick Linnell (‘Mr Fix-it’ involved in SAA and Eskom) and former Eskom board chair Zola Tsotsi. Myeni did not respond and did not submit an affidavit. Commission chair Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo reached a decision: Is privilege against self-incrimination justified? Homeyr dealt with the matter held over from the previous session in regard to whether the invocation of privilege against self-incrimination was justified. She informed the commission that the Constitutional Court in January gave a judgment on self-incrimination in the case between the secretary of the commission and former president Jacob Zuma. Hofmeyr read paragraph 109 of the judgment: “However, it lies with a witness before a commission to claim privilege against self-incrimination. In the event of doing so, the witness must raise the question of privilege with the Chairperson of the Commission and must demonstrate how an answer to the question in issue would breach the privilege. If the Chairperson is persuaded, he or she may permit the witness not to answer the question. Privilege against self-incrimination is not there for the taking by witnesses. There must be sufficient grounds that in answering a question, the witness will incriminate himself or herself in the commission of a specified crime.” Hofmeyr informed the commission that the legal team had concluded that Myeni had abused this privilege. Zondo directed that Myeni will have to answer the questions that she declined to answer at the last session due to invoking privilege, by affidavit, to be delivered to the commission by June 7. Myeni addressed Zondo in isiZulu, saying she wanted her neighbours to hear her side of the story. Zondo said that she had not asked for an interpreter, and that she must answer in English but can later submit her answers in isiZulu in writing. He said the commission could consider this and admit it with the evidence and put it on the website. Eskom-related evidence, led by Seleka Linnell had testified to the commission that he met with Myeni on March 6, 2015 at the former president’s official residence in Pretoria, to which he was called by Myeni. Read: How did an outsider get to call the shots on Eskom? (Oct 2020) She informed him that Zuma wanted a commission of inquiry into Eskom, and that they would attend a meeting with the former president at his official residence in Durban on March 8, 2015. Tsotsi had also testified about the meeting. Myeni gave her version of the meetings: Myeni said she was glad she was before the commission to “clarify issues”. Tsotsi would have abdicated his responsibility if he had approached Zuma, “he would have been undermining the minister”. Later on she said that “there are no shortcuts in dealing with issues of corporate governance”. 