Aspen Pharmacare Holdings plans to expand its manufacturing capabilities to improve access to vaccines in Africa. Africa’s largest pharmaceutical company is seeking assurances on technology transfers and assistance with licenses, chief executive officer Stephen Saad said in a statement after a seminar hosted by French President Emmanuel Macron and South African President Cyril Ramaphosa. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. The campaign is “so that Africa can lessen its reliance of being an importer of 99% of all its vaccines,” Saad said. Sub Saharan Africa has only managed to vaccinate 2% of its population against the coronavirus to date. Read/listen: Aspen on the up There are fewer than 10 vaccine manufacturers in Africa, based across South Africa, Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia and Senegal, according to the World Health Organization. And most of those carry out packaging and labelling rather than manufacturing. Macron said during a visit to South Africa this week that France was in favour of lifting hurdles to allow vaccine production on the continent. France already has a partnership with South Africa’s Biovac Institute and would soon start a project with the Durban-based Aspen, according to Macron. The country supports waiving of intellectual property rights for Covid-19 vaccines, a move also supported by US President Joe Biden. Aspen has a deal with Johnson & Johnson to fill and finish its version of the Covid-19 vaccine at its R3.4 billion plant completed last year. It also produces dexamethasone and aesthetics used to treat the virus. © 2021 Bloomberg