JSE-listed construction group Raubex has grown its secured order book to a record R17.1 billion on the back of increased public sector awards, particularly by the SA National Roads Agency (Sanral). “Indications are that the construction cycle may finally be turning in the South African market and the group’s strong management team, supported by a healthy balance sheet, position Raubex well for future growth,” said Raubex CEO Rudolf Fourie on Monday. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Significant new awards secured by Raubex in the second half of its 2021 financial year to end-February: A R1.43 billion Sanral contract on the N2 from Kwamashu to Umdloti River Bridge. A R1.44 billion Sanral contract on N3 from Cato Ridge to Dardanelles. A R1.48 billion Sanral contract on N3 from Dardanelles to Lynnfield Park. A R458 million Sanral contract on the R510 from Bierspruit to Thabazimbi. A R362 million contract on the R573 (Moloto Road) from Slovo to Siyabuswa. A R2.5 billion engineering, procurement and construction (EPC) contract for the upgrading of the Beitbridge Border Post in Zimbabwe. Biggest contract to date Fourie said the two-year Beitbridge Border Post concession contract is Raubex’s single biggest contract to date and involves the upgrading of the Zimbabwe border post and the development of a town, dam and infrastructure around the border post. The contract was awarded to Raubex by Zim Borders and is largely being funded by South African banks, with Raubex being paid in US dollars, he said. “We kicked off on about December 12 and it’s progressing quite well. There are not any community issues and we are on track at the moment.” Fourie added that Raubex also has a pipeline of potential further work valued at R20 billion “where pricing-wise we are in the running”. He stressed that the group would not be awarded all this work but could get about 50% of it. However, Fourie said these contracts are still subject to adjudication, technicalities on Raubex’s bids, and the projects going ahead. Mining, and more from Sanral He added that Raubex’s materials division is pricing three big mining tenders, one where the group is the preferred bidder, that are each valued at about R3 billion over five years. “This is on the back of strong commodity prices. We are quite excited about the pipeline of potential work in this area and will watch it closely in the next 12 months,” he said. Fourie said there is also about R10 billion of Sanral work that has not been awarded and the awards are still outstanding. “Some of the projects are quite expensive so we are not sure they are going ahead,” he said. Renewable energy Fourie said encouraging prospects exist in the renewable energy sector where a significant volume of work has been priced in the Risk Mitigation IPP (Independent Power Producer) Programme. Raubex’s infrastructure division is aligning itself to participate in Bid Window 5 of the Renewable Energy IPP Procurement (Reippp) Programme, which closes at the end of the year and offers encouraging prospects over the medium term, he added. Africa Fourie said Raubex has adopted a more conservative strategy to tendering for work in Africa and will only consider projects with suitable risk and reward profiles. This follows the group incurring an operating loss of R95.4 million in the year to February 2021 on the Douala Grand Mall project in Cameroon due to delays caused by logistical issues at the harbour for imported goods into Cameroon and the Covid-19 lockdown. Fourie said the Covid-19 impact on this project alone was about R60 million but the group has completed the project and “is pulling out of Cameroon”. He added that Africa was traditionally always about 50% of Raubex’s order book but the group has had problem contracts in both Zambia and Cameroon. Fourie said “it’s very tough to work in Africa” and it has become tougher with Covid-19. “We have decided there are enough projects in South Africa to concentrate on. We handle the Zimbabwe border project almost as a South African project so that is not affected,” he said. Resilience Fourie said over the past year the group has proven its resilience and its ability to navigate tough industry conditions and unforeseen challenges like the Covid-19 pandemic. He said a good recovery was made in the second half of the year, with operations reverting to normal levels of efficiency Raubex on Monday reported a 49.4% decline in headline earnings per share to 81.9 cents in the year to February from 161.7 cents in the previous year. Revenue rose by 1.3% to R8.85 billion but operating profit slumped by 24.1% to R364.5 million. Cash generated from operations however improved by 68.2% to R1.33 billion. A final cash dividend of 29 cents per share was declared. Listen to Simon Brown’s interview with Raubex CEO Rudolf Fourie here. Analyst’s take Peregrine Capital executive chair David Fraser said Raubex’s financial results and prospects were “pretty heartening” but the group needs to be careful not to fall into the trap of overtrading. He added that Raubex has a nice base load of work at a decent margin and it is now about execution. He said the group has the right strategy to price up “for anything extra [work] they will get”. “I think they are a good company and are almost the new Wilson Bayly [WBHO] now that they have moved into building and PPPs [public private partnerships] and Australia. I think they are very much following in WBHO’s footsteps,” he said. However, Fraser warned that the construction industry is an industry where “one bad contract can take away two or three years of good work, which is very frustrating”. Shares in Raubex rose 5.28% on Monday to close at R28.00. 