The African Union’s health agency said countries on the continent should use more than one type of Covid-19 shot to complete people’s vaccine cycles if needed, as several states are facing shortages. “In the event that there is absolute clarity that people will not get their second doses, it’s better to opt for that, than not get their full immunisation,” John Nkengasong, director of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, said in an online briefing Thursday. “There’s a likelihood that given what’s going on in India, there will be a significant delay,” for countries that are using the shot developed by AstraZeneca and University of Oxford, he said. Subscribe for full access to all our share and unit trust data tools, our award-winning articles, and support quality journalism in the process. You will be redirected to a checkout page.
To view all features and options, click here. A monthly subscription is charged pro rata, based on the day of purchase. This is non-refundable and includes a R5 once-off sign-up fee.
A yearly subscription is refundable within 14 days of purchase and includes a 365-day membership. Nkengasong said countries should be looking at options for “if and how to get Johnson & Johnson vaccines” that are available to the African Vaccine Acquisition Task Team as an alternative. That wouldn’t be as a booster shot, “but a whole new effort to close the loop of immunisation.” “It’s a single-dose vaccine and I don’t think from an epidemiological standpoint we need to wait until the antibodies from the first immunisation wane before administering the J&J vaccine,” he said. Nine African nations including South Africa, Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Morocco, Uganda, Botswana, Zambia and Kenya have reported the B.1.617 strain that is devastating India and which initial studies show spreads more easily. “The way this virus circulates and transmits suggests it’s a question of time before this variant will be spreading more extensively across the continent,” Nkengasong said. He again called for increased testing for the coronavirus after this dropped 6% last week. Separately, Kenya’s Health Cabinet Secretary Mutahi Kagwe has called for calm from those who’ve received their first dose of the vaccine developed by AstraZeneca and University of Oxford, assuring those Kenyans they will get a second dose. The government is also holding talks with manufacturers of other vaccines, including Johnson & Johnson, he said via Twitter. © 2021 Bloomberg L.P.